% The Abolitionists on PBS
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% January 15, 2013

Last Tuesday, PBS premiered the first episode of [*The
Abolitionists*][], a three-part documentary showcasing the lives of five
prominent antislavery Americans. I was honored to appear briefly in the
film and hope the show sparks increased popular interest in the history
of abolitionism.

Like any documentary---or any work of history, for that matter---the
film is [open to criticism][]. Even in a three-hour film, it would be
difficult to place abolitionists fully in their historical context,
especially since the filmmakers spotlight only five figures out of many
they could have chosen.

Indeed, the film itself frequently points beyond its own quintet to the
larger cast of characters that participated in the actual drama of the
abolitionist movement. In one scene in Episode One, for example, William
Lloyd Garrison addresses an African American man standing in the offices
of *The Liberator* whom he calls "William"---a likely reference to
William Cooper Nell. Nell was a man who could easily inspire a
three-hour biopic of his own, one that would further showcase the role
of black abolitionists in the movement, the close connection between the
fight against slavery and the fight against racial discrimination, and
the conflicts and schisms that troubled even the closest
abolitionists.[^1]

Still, I think Nell---one of the country's first African American
historians---would be glad to see a film like this exist, and even
gladder to see the range of critical discourse about it on the Internet.
In a recent book that I highly recommend, historian Margot Minardi notes
that Nell and other abolitionists always "perceived history as a story
that was still being written," in contrast to antebellum Americans who
preferred to build monuments to the past and "privileged the idea of
history as a received narrative." As a result they would probably
welcome the conversation surrounding the film as much as the film
itself, and would be disappointed if the movie were viewed as a static
monument.[^2]

In fact, the abolitionists would probably view a film like this as an
opportunity to reflect *on* the present, not just to reflect the past.
Wendell Phillips, another important abolitionist not featured in the
film, believed that "the honors we grant mark how high we stand," but he
cautioned against using history only for self-congratulation. "The men
we honor, and the maxims we lay down in measuring our favorites, show
the level and morals of the time," he once said, but then as now, those
very maxims may well reveal how much more there is to be done. Any time
a state or nation "offers a pedestal for the statue of a citizen," or a
PBS documentary for that matter, Phillips would say that "such a step
deserves thought. On this let us dare to think."[^3]

I hope---and am optimistic---that viewers of this film will "dare to
think," and I believe the film invites such daring. By asking viewers to
participate in [making a map][] or to talk about the film on social
media, and by dramatizing the everyday lives of the characters, the film
encourages the audience to interact with history instead of receiving it
passively. If you've come to this page interested in learning more about
the abolitionists, then read on. Investigate, question, dare to think,
and you'll be doing part of what I think the abolitionists themselves
would demand of you if they were still here.

Further Reading
---------------

The American Experience website has a good list of [related books and
websites][] on the abolitionists, including a link to an extensive
[bibliography hosted at IUPUI][]. There are also some additional [links
to resources][] on one of my course websites.

I also have a fair number of [bookmarks I have collected][] on
abolitionism over the years, and my LibraryThing collection lists about
[120 books on the subject][].

Because my own research has centered on abolitionism since 2001, I also
have several publications on the movement available online. These
include:

-   The [introduction to my forthcoming book][] on Garrisonian
    abolitionists.
-   An [essay][] on Frederick Douglass's autobiographies and his
    disagreements with William Lloyd Garrison, a topic discussed in
    Episode Two of the documentary.
-   An article about [John Brown's relationships with black
    abolitionists][].
-   An article on interracial abolitionism and [how the abolitionists
    celebrated holidays][] like the Fourth of July.
-   An article on [why Garrisonian abolitionists began to call for
    disunion][], which views this demand as more political and pragmatic
    than is often assumed.

For those interested in my other publications, whose notes can point you
to other scholarship on the subject, feel free to check out [my CV][].

I also hope to be available on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/wcaleb) when the
second and third episodes of *The Abolitionists* air, in case anyone wants to
chat about the film or antislavery history. Happy watching and reading!

[^1]: For an excellent recent book about black activists like Nell and
    their struggle to win both abolition and citizenship rights, I
    recommend Stephen Kantrowitz's *More Than Freedom: Fighting for
    Black Citizenship in a White Republic, 1829--1889* (New York:
    Penguin, 2012). Many of Nell's writings can also be found at the
    excellent [Black Abolitionist Archive][]. His most famous work,
    *Colored Patriots of the American Revolution*, is also [online][].

[^2]: Margot Minardi, *Making Slavery History: Abolitionism and the
    Politics of Memory in Massachusetts* (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 2010), 94.

[^3]: Quotes are taken from Phillips's speech "Idols," which you can
    read at [Google Books][]. Speaking of the present, several
    historians of abolitionism have recently joined forces in a group
    called [Historians of Against Slavery][], whose aim is to provide
    well-informed historical context for ongoing struggles against
    forced labor and contemporary forms of enslavement.

  [*The Abolitionists*]: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/films/abolitionists/
  [open to criticism]: http://earlyamericanists.com/2013/01/10/the-abolitionists-in-primetime-two-responses/
  [making a map]: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/interactive-map/abolitionists-map/
  [related books and websites]: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/further-reading/abolitionists-further-reading/
  [bibliography hosted at IUPUI]: http://americanabolitionist.liberalarts.iupui.edu
  [links to resources]: http://abolition.blogs.rice.edu/resources/
  [bookmarks I have collected]: http://pinboard.in/u:wcaleb/t:abolitionism
  [120 books on the subject]: http://www.librarything.com/catalog/wcm&tag=abolitionism
  [introduction to my forthcoming book]: /book-introduction.html
  [essay]: /lives-of-frederick-douglass.html
  [John Brown's relationships with black abolitionists]: http://hdl.handle.net/1911/64545
  [how the abolitionists celebrated holidays]: http://hdl.handle.net/1911/27613
  [why Garrisonian abolitionists began to call for disunion]: http://hdl.handle.net/1911/27612
  [my CV]: /cv.html
  [@wcaleb]: http://twitter.com/wcaleb
  [Black Abolitionist Archive]: http://research.udmercy.edu/find/special_collections/digital/baa/index.php?collectionCode=baa&field=DC_creator&term=%22Nell%2C+William+C.+%28William+Cooper%29%2C+1816-1874.%22
  [online]: http://docsouth.unc.edu/neh/nell/menu.html
  [Google Books]: http://books.google.com/books?id=mrAyAAAAMAAJ&lpg=PA251&ots=u-ANvGMmYl&pg=PA242
  [Historians of Against Slavery]: http://historiansagainstslavery.org
