% Announcing the Dick Dowling Digital Archive
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% April 5, 2012 

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [Announcing the
Dick Dowling Digital Archive][].
</div>

It gives me great pleasure to announce the unveiling of the Dick Dowling
Digital Archive and the related exhibit, [Dick Dowling and Sabine Pass
in History and Memory][]. The collection and the exhibit, both proudly
powered by [Omeka][], were produced by myself and undergraduate students
in Civil War history at Rice University in collaboration with [the
Woodson Research Center][] at Fondren Library, the [Houston Area Digital
Archives][], and the [Humanities Research Center][].

Dick Dowling was an Irish American Houstonian most famous for his role
in a Civil War battle fought at Sabine Pass on September 8, 1863.
Beginning in [the Spring 2011 semester][], Rice students in HIST 246,
“The American Civil War Era,” began locating, scanning, describing, and
writing about historical documents related to Dowling which were then
uploaded into an Omeka collection. Students also produced four
interpretive digital projects that also now reside in the collection.
The Movie Group produced an introductory video ([group blog][] and
[video][]). The Map Group produced several maps with ArcGIS showing the
past locations of Dowling’s statue in the city ([group blog][1],
[map][], and [map guide][]). The Timeline Group used [SIMILE][] to
produce a dynamic timeline of events ([group blog][2] and [timeline][]).
And the Podcast Group created several audio tours meant to be heard at
various Dowling-related sites in Houston ([group blog][3] and [audio
tours][]).

Other students in the spring and [fall semester][] of 2011 worked to
draft, organize, and lay out the exhibit pages for [The Afterlives of
Dick Dowling][], the first major section of the Omeka exhibit featuring
items in the Dick Dowling Digital Archive. Students in the fall semester
also helped me to think through the other major section, [Slavery and
the Battle of Sabine Pass][], which I composed in bits and pieces over
the last several months.

In a future blog post I hope to say more about how this project
developed. For now, I’m happy to announce its existence and invite you
to take a look around. Please feel free to leave comments, questions, or
corrections here or at dowling-archive AT rice.edu.

  [Announcing the Dick Dowling Digital Archive]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=210
    "Permanent Link: Announcing the Dick Dowling Digital Archive"
  [Dick Dowling and Sabine Pass in History and Memory]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling
  [Omeka]: http://www.omeka.org
  [the Woodson Research Center]: http://library.rice.edu/collections/WRC
  [Houston Area Digital Archives]: http://digital.houstonlibrary.org/cdm/
  [Humanities Research Center]: http://hrc.rice.edu
  [the Spring 2011 semester]: http://hist246.blogs.rice.edu
  [group blog]: http://dowlingmovie.blogs.rice.edu
  [video]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/766
  [1]: http://dowlingmap.blogs.rice.edu
  [map]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/763
  [map guide]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/764
  [SIMILE]: http://www.simile-widgets.org/timeline/
  [2]: http://dowlingdates.blogs.rice.edu
  [timeline]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/timeline
  [3]: http://dowlingcast.blogs.rice.edu
  [audio tours]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/browse?search=&advanced%5B0%5D%5Belement_id%5D=50&advanced%5B0%5D%5Btype%5D=contains&advanced%5B0%5D%5Bterms%5D=Audio+Tour&range=&collection=4&type=&tags=&submit_search=Search
  [fall semester]: http://civilwar.blogs.rice.edu
  [The Afterlives of Dick Dowling]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/afterlives-of-dick-dowling
  [Slavery and the Battle of Sabine Pass]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/slavery-and-sabine-pass
