% Before Juneteenth: The Emancipation Proclamation in Texas
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% September 25, 2012

<div class="well">This is an inexact transcript of a lecture I recently gave at <a href="http://www.hbu.edu/Choosing-HBU/Academics/Colleges-Schools/College-of-Arts-Humanities/Departments/Department-of-History/Emancipation-Proclamation-Commemoration.aspx">The Emancipation Proclamation: A Turning Point</a>, a commemoration event in Houston marking the sesquicentennial of the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation last week.</div>

In 1926, the *Dallas Morning News* began publishing a serial comic strip
on Texas history. It ran for only two years, but it shaped the way that
generations of Texas schoolchildren learned about their state's past.
And it highlights the uncertain place of the Emancipation Proclamation
in Texans' memory of the Civil War.

The comic, illustrated by Jack Patton with captions by "amusements
editor" John Rosenfeld Jr., was simple and even easy to miss---its four
panels were run weekly at the bottom of the *News*, separated from the
national strips. But its vivid depictions of historical figures like Sam
Houston and William Barrett Travis proved extremely popular---so popular
that after its conclusion, the strip was published in a 217-page
hardback edition called *Texas History Movies*. That book went through
multiple printings, and between 1928 and 1960, an abridged booklet
version was distributed, for free, to millions of Texas schoolchildren
under the sponsorship of Magnolia Petroleum Company, later Mobil
oil.[^1]

As the cover suggests, the *Texas History Movies* dealt at length with
Texas's early history and events. They were much thinner, however, on
the subject of the Civil War, and they said nothing about the event we
are commemorating today. The original abridged version of *Texas History
Movies* stopped at the Battle of San Jacinto, though the booklet given
to students was later expanded. But even those who read the full version
of the comics would have learned little about the Civil War---and even
less about the Emancipation Proclamation. The full hardback edition
included only one page--four panels on the *third-to-last* page---about
the War, and the main message of the caption was that the Civil War
barely affected Texas at all. It contained no mention of the Preliminary
Emancipation Proclamation of 1862, Emancipation Proclamation of 1863, no
mention of the over 200,000 slaves living in Texas at the beginning of
the war, and no mention even of emancipation after the war.

![*Texas History Movies*, 1928 edition][]

A 1970 edition of *Texas History Movies*, with new text by O. O.
Mitchell, Jr., did mention slavery on the single page about the Civil
War. But it, too, failed to say anything about the end of slavery or the
Emancipation Proclamation.

![*Texas History Movies*, 1970 edition][]

Only in 2007, when Austin artist Jack Johnson published a completely
revised *New Texas History Movies* for the Texas State Historical
Association, did slavery and emancipation make it into this publication
in a significant way. For the first time, Johnson devoted several pages
to the Civil War and to Reconstruction, calling special attention to the
successes of freedpeople after the war in winning political office and
organizing new communities. But the Emancipation Proclamation remains
absent in this latest edition. In the panel dealing with emancipation,
Jackson writes that it was Union general Gordon Granger who "freed the
slaves" in 1865, not President Lincoln in 1862 or 1863.

![*Texas History Movies*, 2007 edition][]

If the *Texas History Movies* are any guide to the way that Texans have
thought about the Civil War during the past century, they show that the
Emancipation Proclamation has not historically figured in Texans' mind
as a "turning point" *here*. Remember that these comic strips were
likely seen by millions of schoolchildren in Texas between 1928 and
1960. And if those students read these comics, it's easy to see how they
could have ended up with the idea that Lincoln's Proclamation had
scarcely any effect in their state at all.

A lot has changed, of course, since 1960. But even today, I would not be
surprised to learn that many Texas schoolchildren have only the faintest
idea of what the Emancipation Proclamation meant for Texas in
particular. Consider the [guidelines][] that history teachers are
currently offered from the state for teaching the Civil War. In eighth
grade, when students study U.S. History, they are required "to explain
... significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort
Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the
announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at
Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln."

In seventh grade, however, when students focus on *Texas* History, the
Emancipation Proclamation is not mentioned as a significant event in the
state. Instead, when learning about the Civil War here, seventh-graders
are expected to "identify significant individuals and events concerning
Texas and the Civil War such as John Bell Hood, John Reagan, Francis
Lubbock, Thomas Green, John Magruder and the Battle of Galveston, the
Battle of Sabine Pass, and the Battle of Palmito Ranch." In short,
students in Texas are still taught that that the Emancipation
Proclamation was a turning point in the nation, but not that it was a
turning point in the state.

It would be a mistake, of course, to place too much weight on these
guidelines; I'm sure that individual teachers do cover the Emancipation
Proclamation in their Texas history classes, particularly when talking
about Juneteenth. And students in all three grades of middle school
observe [Celebrate Freedom Week][], which includes mention of the
Proclamation.

More importantly, schools are not the only place where history is taught
and remembered. Outside of the classroom, African Americans in Texas
have long commemorated emancipation as the most important legacy of the
Civil War in the state. And unlike the early editions of the *Texas
History Movies*, which contained numerous racist caricatures and erased
slavery almost entirely from their depictions of Texas history, black
Texans have always kept the memory of slavery and emancipation alive,
whether inside or outside of school. In 1965, for example, African
Americans in Houston organized a "Century of Emancipation March and
Parade" to commemorate the coming of emancipation, "lest we forget."[^2]

Yet even celebrations like this one agree, in one respect, with the
picture of the Civil War represented by the *Texas History Movies*. You
probably noticed, for instance, that the "Century of Emancipation March
and Parade" was held in 1965---one hundred years after
*Juneteenth*---not in 1963, one hundred years after Lincoln's
Proclamation. Juneteenth---or June 19, 1865---has long been remembered
among African Americans in Texas as an even more significant date than
September 22, 1862, or January 1, 1863. Juneteenth was the date, as
we've already seen, when Union General Gordon Granger *read* the
Emancipation Proclamation in Galveston, and soon after that event,
freedpeople in Texas began marking the occasion at sites like
Emancipation Park. But Juneteenth occurred after the Civil War was over,
and almost three years after the Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation
we are marking today.

All of this raises the questions I'd like to focus on this afternoon:
Did the Emancipation Proclamation have any effects on Texas before
Juneteenth? Was it a turning point here? Or were the *Texas History
Movies* and generations of African Americans who remembered Juneteenth
right that not much happened here during the War itself?

* * * * *

To address these questions, I'm going to briefly make three points this
afternoon. First, I'm going to show why the Emancipation Proclamation
was not *the* turning point in the history of emancipation in Texas.
Then I'm going to explain why the Emancipation Proclamation was still
*a* turning point, even in Texas and even before Juneteenth. Finally,
I'll conclude by considering what may be a more difficult question: how
far did the Emancipation Proclamation turn the fates of enslaved people
in Texas, and which direction did it turn them in? That is, even if the
Emancipation Proclamation *had* been the major turning point in Texas
history, did the vision of freedom it represented match the visions of
freedpeople themselves?

I'll turn to that difficult question at the end. First, however, point
number one: the Emancipation Proclamation was *not* the major turning
point in the history of emancipation. Why? Well, whether intentionally
or not, the *Texas History Movies* we looked at earlier actually
contained a clue: Texas was generally "removed from the theater of the
war," and for enslaved Texans, the absence of Union troops dramatically
limited the impact of federal orders like the Emancipation Proclamation.

Elsewhere in the Confederacy, historians now know that the presence of
Union troops directly undermined the peculiar institution by encouraging
hundreds of thousands of slaves to flee to Union military lines.
Wherever the Union army was on the move, slaves were on the move, too.
Indeed, as early as the summer of 1861, African Americans in Virginia
were already braving incredible dangers and long odds to present
themselves to Union commanders in the war's eastern theater. And the
flight of slaves to Union fortifications and "contraband" camps
continued throughout the war, forcing Congress to respond with policies
that only encouraged more flight, long before Lincoln had decided to
act. Yet the rush of slaves away from plantations to Union lines
certainly accelerated after the Emancipation Proclamation and the
movement of Union forces into the heart of the Confederacy. As Ulysses
S. Grant's army moved into Tennessee after the fall of Vicksburg in July
1863, for example, one Union soldier noted that the rush of slaves was
"like the oncoming of cities," and by the end of the war, historians
estimate that as many as half a million slaves had made it behind Union
lines.[^3]

Enslaved people in the Confederate South seem to have understood
instinctively from the beginning that Union armies presented them with
unique, unprecedented opportunities for flight and freedom. In Texas,
however, Union forces never made it to the state's interior, where there
were approximately 200,000 enslaved people when the war began. Galveston
was occupied briefly in the fall of 1862, but on New Year's Day, 1863,
the very day when the Emancipation Proclamation was scheduled to take
effect, Confederate forces led by General John Bankhead Magruder
recaptured the port. Later Union attempts to occupy either Texas were
either limited to the state's southern coastline, far away from the
counties with the densest slave populations, or they were turned back
before they even reached Texas, as in the disastrous Red River campaign
of spring 1864. As the historian Randolph P. Campbell notes, "federal
troops thus had no opportunity to create more than minor disruptions of
slavery in Texas."[^4]

Even when federal troops finally did arrive in Texas at the conclusion
of the war, historians have emphasized that emancipation proceeded more
slowly than in other states, partly because slavery had survived
relatively undisturbed for so long. Texas newspapers still contained
advertisements of slaves for sale in the early months of 1865,
indicating optimism among white Texans that slavery would survive the
war. As historian Dale Baum notes, "expectations that Texas would elude
the ramifications of Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation died
hard."[^5] One slave auction even took place on Congress Street in
Austin in April 1865.[^6]

Even when Juneteenth came only two months later, life remained largely
the same for many enslaved people in Texas, particularly in isolated
rural areas. As one historian has noted, the spread of emancipation was
"ragged" in Texas, and violent too. Even after Juneteenth, many people
of color were murdered, lynched, and harrassed by white Texans who
operated with relative impunity in the early days of military
occupation. "The war may not have brought a great deal of bloodshed to
Texas," notes historian Elizabeth Hayes Turner, "but the peace certainly
did."[^7]

As all of this suggests, it would be a mistake to consider the
preliminary proclamation of 1862 or the Emancipation Proclamation of
1863---or even Juneteenth, for that matter---as *the* single turning
points in the history of Texas slavery. But the second point I'd like to
make is that the Emancipation Proclamation was still *a* turning point.
In at least two indirect but significant ways, Lincoln's proclamation in
Washington did impact even faraway Texas, and even *before* Juneteenth.

First, the Emancipation Proclamation encouraged tens of thousands of
white Confederate slaveholders in *other* states to flee to Texas with
their enslaved people, a process known as "refugeeing." Although Texas
slaveholders clearly remained confident about the survival of slavery
right up to the end of the war, slaveholders in neighboring states were
not so sure, especially after the fall of New Orleans, Union occupation
of the Mississippi River valley, and---most of all---Lincoln's
Emancipation Proclamation. After January 1, 1863, as white planters from
Arkansas, Missouri, and especially Louisiana watched the approach of
Union armies, they understood that the closer the Yankees got to their
homes and plantations, the more precarious their control over slaves
became. Many began to move from southwestern Arkansas and Louisiana into
Texas.

In deciding to take or send their slaves into Texas for safekeeping,
planters admitted what their slaves already knew---that slaves would
quickly take advantage of opportunities to emancipate themselves,
especially as news of the Emancipation Proclamation spread. Priscilla
Bond, a white slaveholding woman from Maryland who was living in
southwestern Louisiana by the time of the Emancipation Proclamation,
reported in her journal of October 1863 that one of her slaves, Amanda
or "Mandy," "says she hopes the Yankees will come here; she will tell
them to take our clothes & things from us, says she hates the *Bonds*. I
hope," wrote Mrs. Bond after this outburst, that "[Mandy] will be
dispatched from here soon." The very next month, when a small group of
about 50 Union soldiers did ride into town, Bond observed that one rode
up to her slave Mandy briefly and said "*We'll hurry*," before seeking
out some information from other "negroes" in the town. Later that month,
Bond's family sold Mandy away rather than risk the total loss of their
human property.[^8]

Many planters in similar situations, however, chose not to sell their
slaves but to "dispatch" them to Texas, away from areas where they might
encounter Union troops or take advantage of wartime chaos to run away.
One Baton Rouge planter named Eliza McHatton noted that as federal
forces moved closer and closer to her plantation along the Mississippi
River, planters in the neighborhood became extremely "fearful ... of
negro assemblages, so apprehensive lest they communicate from plantation
to plantation, and a stray spark enkindle the fires of sedition and
rebellion." Eventually "a number of our negroes were sent to my
brother's plantation" in Texas, McHatton remembered, in order to
"partially relieve us of an element of querulous discontent that was
fast becoming dangerous."[^9]

McHatton's slaves were not the only ones run into Texas. A British
traveler in the Confederacy, Arthur J. Fremantle, noted in May 1863 that
hundreds of slaves were being brought into the Lone Star State. Although
estimates vary widely, many historians now believe that at least 50,000
refugeed slaves, and perhaps twice or three times that many, were
brought to Texas from other states, most of them in the year after
Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation went into effect. Many were hired
out to work in Texas or sometimes forced to build military
fortifications along the Texas coast, and it is highly likely that these
men and women, well before Juneteenth, brought news to Texas slaves of
the dramatic changes afoot in the rest of the South, caused above all by
what Lincoln and his government had said about slavery.[^10]

There was, however, a second, more direct way in which the Emancipation
Proclamation affected Texas, which has to do less with what Lincoln said
about slavery and more with what he said about soldiers. Although it's
often too easily forgotten, the Emancipation Proclamation was also an
*Enlistment* Proclamation. At the end of the document, Lincoln declared
that people freed under the terms of the Proclamation would now "be
received into the armed service of the United States."

In reality, people of color and even freedpeople in the South had been
received into the armed service even before January 1, 1863, both
because of previous acts of Congress and because of the decisions of
commanders in the field. Records show that African American sailors even
participated on the Union side in the Battle of Galveston that took
place on the very day the Proclamation was finalized, and some were
among those captured by Confederate forces and marched to Houston. But
by stamping the controversial measure of arming African Americans with
the imprimatur of the Executive branch, Lincoln's Proclamation
encouraged even more concerted efforts to enlist men of color in the
armed forces and led directly to the organization of United States
Colored Troops regiments.

In fact, although Texas saw few large battles during the War, those that
did occur showed directly the results of the government's enlistment
policies after the Emancipation Proclamation. African American
sailors---some of whom were escaped slaves---[participated even at the
Battle of Sabine Pass][] of September 1863. And over two hundred members
of the [62nd United States Colored Infantry][] fought in the [Battle of
Palmito Ranch][], which has often been called the last battle of the
Civil War. This regiment of black troops was not from Texas; it was
raised in Missouri. But the regiment was first recruited in June 1863 as
a byproduct of the changes wrought by the Emancipation Proclamation.

In sum, Texas was not entirely an island unto itself during the Civil
War, and the shock effects of the Emancipation Proclamation reverberated
even there. First, emancipation increased panic and uncertainty among
waves of planters who rushed with their enslaved people to Texas,
doubtless bringing news and information about the Union's activities and
intentions into the state well before General Gordon Granger arrived.
Moreover, the Emancipation Proclamation removed the final barriers to
the rapid mobilization of United States Colored Troops, who also saw
action in Texas before Juneteenth. After the war was over, African
American troops were also among the many thousands who were marched to
the Texas-Mexico border to assist Mexican liberals and combat the plans
of the French empire to attack the weakened United States from the
South. In a [1941 interview][], former slave Harriet Smith of Hempstead,
Texas, remembered watching, as a little girl, as "colored soldiers"
marched by her home on their way to San Antonio---a vivid memory that
must have seemed like quite a "turning point" indeed to a young enslaved
or recently emancipated woman.

Given all this, it should be impossible to return to a depiction of
Civil War Texas like that in the original *Texas History Movies*---a
Texas in which the Emancipation Proclamation did not register at all.
Still, we should keep the stress on that little big word "a"---the
Proclamation was *a* turning point in Texas history, not *the* pivot on
which everything turned.

One reason for this, as we've already seen, is that Union troops did not
occupy the state in large numbers until *after* Juneteenth, limiting the
number of slaves who could use Lincoln's armies to alter their fates.
That is one reason why planters from neighboring states believed their
slave property would be safe in Texas, and why white Texans continued to
buy and sell slaves right up to the end of the Civil War. "Final
freedom" would have to wait for the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution and a more extensive military presence by federal troops in
the state.

Even once these later turning points came, however, we should be careful
not to assume that emancipation brought the freedom that enslaved people
envisioned for themselves and their families. [In the closing moments of
the talk, I discussed Lincoln's mention of compensation and colonization
in the Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, and his advise in the
final Proclamation to freed slaves to work for wages, noting how these
visions of freedom as wage labor did not always operate to the benefit
of African Americans in the immediate aftermath of the war. In that
sense, the Emancipation Proclamation is a turning point that is still
turning; perhaps any proclamation of emancipation needs to be seen, I
suggested, as "preliminary," and as an invitation to further discussion
about what constitutes freedom.]

[^1]: See Jack Johnson, "A Bit of History about Texas History Movies,"
    in *New Texas History Movies* (Austin: Texas State Historical
    Association, 2007), 44--48; [@crisp2009, 7--8.]

[^2]: For details about this parade, visit
    <http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/542>, which is part of
    the online exhibit, [Dick Dowling and the Battle of Sabine Pass in
    History and Memory][].

[^3]: Steven Hahn, *A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles
    in the Rural South From Slavery To the Great Migration* (Cambridge,
    Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003), 72.

[^4]: Randolph B. Campbell, *An Empire for Slavery: The Peculiar
    Institution in Texas* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
    Press, 1989), 233.

[^5]: Dale Baum, “Slaves Taken to Texas for Safekeeping during the Civil
    War,” in *The Fate of Texas: The Civil War and the Lone Star State*,
    ed. Charles D. Grear (Fayetteville: University of
    Arkansas Press, 2008), 84.

[^6]: Campbell, *Empire for Slavery*, 241.

[^7]: Elizabeth Hayes Turner, “Juneteenth: Emancipation and Memory,” in
    *Lone Star Pasts: Memory and History in Texas*, ed. Gregg
    Cantrell and Elizabeth Hayes Turner (College Station: Texas A&M
    University Press, 2007), 143–175, 147.

[^8]: Kimberly Harrison, ed., *A Maryland Bride in the Deep South: The Civil
    War Diary of Priscilla Bond* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
    2006), 247, 251, 254.

[^9]: Quotes from McHatton are taken from the electronic edition of her
    memoir, *From Flag to Flag*, published on [DocSouth][].

[^10]: For the best discussion of numbers, see Baum, "Slaves Taken to Texas." Some
    contemporaries estimated that 150,000 slaves were refugeed into
    Texas, but this number is likely exaggerated.

  [*Texas History Movies*, 1928 edition]: http://wiki.wcaleb.rice.edu/img/thm1928.jpg
  [*Texas History Movies*, 1970 edition]: http://wiki.wcaleb.rice.edu/img/thm1970.jpg
  [*Texas History Movies*, 2007 edition]: http://wiki.wcaleb.rice.edu/img/thm2007.jpg
  [guidelines]: http://ritter.tea.state.tx.us/rules/tac/chapter113/ch113b.html
  [Celebrate Freedom Week]: http://info.sos.state.tx.us/pls/pub/readtac$ext.TacPage?sl=R&app=9&p_dir=&p_rloc=&p_tloc=&p_ploc=&pg=1&p_tac=&ti=19&pt=2&ch=74&rl=33
  [participated even at the Battle of Sabine Pass]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/slavery-and-sabine-pass/5
  [62nd United States Colored Infantry]: http://www.nps.gov/civilwar/search-regiments-detail.htm?regiment_id=UUS0062RI00C
  [Battle of Palmito Ranch]: http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qfp01
  [1941 interview]: http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.afc/afc9999001.t5499a
  [Dick Dowling and the Battle of Sabine Pass in History and Memory]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/1
    "Dick Dowling exhibit at Rice University"
  [DocSouth]: http://docsouth.unc.edu/fpn/ripleyflag/ripley.html
