% The Case of John L. Brown
% Caleb McDaniel
% March 9, 2011

<div class="well">
This page was originally posted on my old blog as [The Case of John L.
Brown][].
</div>

Last Friday, I was very fortunate to be a presenter at the annual
conference of the [Carolina Lowcountry and the Atlantic World program][]
at the College of Charleston. This year’s topic, [“Civil War–Global
Conflict,”][] attracted a great slate of fascinating papers.

Best of all, the conference organizers asked for presenters to
pre-circulate drafts of any length, so the sessions were devoted mostly
to discussion. [I’m posting the paper that I circulated for the
conference][] in Rice’s digital repository ([here’s how and why][]), and
I would welcome any feedback about the paper if you have a chance to
read it. Click below for a full abstract.

My paper is about the infamous Southern trial in which John Brown was
sentenced to death by hanging for aiding slave flight. But I’m not
talking about [*that* John Brown][]. I’m talking about the much less
famous John L. Brown.

John L. Brown was tried and sentenced to hang in South Carolina, not in
Virginia. And his alleged crime (and I say alleged because I am not sure
whether I believe Brown was guilty) was helping an enslaved woman named
Hetty to escape in the fall of 1843. Brown appealed his initial
conviction, but to no avail. (You can [read all about the appeals trial
right here][], in the *Reports of Cases at Law, Argued and Determined in
the Court of Appeals of South Carolina* [1844]). On the basis of a state
law that made it a capital offense to entice slaves to run away, John L.
Brown was sentenced to die on April 26, 1844.

Before that could happen, however, Brown’s sentence attracted widespread
attention in the Northern press, especially from abolitionists. Soon,
the news about John L. Brown crossed the Atlantic too. Many British
newspaper editors picked up the story, and American and British
abolitionists corresponded about it. Outraged British abolitionists used
the case to rally large public meetings in Birmingham, Edinburgh, and
Glasgow calling for Brown’s pardon. The sentence was even denounced on
the floor of Parliament. As a result of these protests, James Henry
Hammond, then governor of South Carolina, soon found himself inundated
with letters and petitions about Brown. One petition drawn up by a group
of British churches boasted 1,300 signatures.

In my paper I do two things. First, I try to explain the significance of
this case of transatlantic abolitionist protest and the reasons why
Brown’s trial became a center of controversy. And second, I use the
Brown trial as a case study for raising some larger questions about
information networks. I use the case to reconsider the ways historians
conceptualize the mechanisms and results of transatlantic abolitionism
in general.

First, I try to reconstruct the reasons why Brown’s case in particular
became a flashpoint. British and American abolitionists reported news of
Southern outrages all the time, but not all of these outrages provoked
full-blown protests and retorts the way Brown’s trial did. The paper
suggests that the timing of the Brown trial was the primary reason why
the case was important both to abolitionists and to South Carolinians.
By paying close attention to the timing of the trial and its fallout, I
believe a case can also be made for its under-appreciated significance.
One of the interesting things about Brown’s trial is that prominent
Southerners, including Governor Hammond himself and the sentencing judge
John Bolton O’Neall, spoke back directly to British abolitionists in
defense of the state’s actions. Indeed, the Brown trial was the
immediate trigger that [prompted Hammond to write what became a
“proslavery classic,”][]in the words of his biographer Drew Gilpin
Faust. For the previous decade, most Southern political leaders had
argued that the best way to deal with abolitionists was to silence and
ignore them. So the reaction of Hammond and O’Neall to the protests over
Brown’s trial represented something of a departure.

My second objective in the paper is to raise some larger questions about
how transatlantic abolitionism and, by extension, nineteenth-century
transnational activism worked. Not surprisingly, abolitionists often
depicted their transatlantic protest campaigns as part of a linear,
fairly straightforward causal chain: Southerners committed some
atrocity; Northern abolitionists publicized it and brought it to the
attention of overseas allies; those overseas allies held meetings,
drafted petitions, and generally applied pressure on American
Southerners; finally, that pressure would force Southerners to relent.
Abolitionists saw the John L. Brown case as a paradigmatic example of
this process in action, especially since Hammond commuted Brown’s
sentence from death to public whipping and ultimately pardoned him
altogether.

For a variety of reasons, the abolitionists’ own descriptions of their
transnational pressure politics have been appealing to scholars as well,
including scholars of contemporary transnational activism like Kathryn
Sikkink, Margaret Keck, and Sidney Tarrow. In their book, *[Activists
Beyond Borders][]*, Keck and Sikkink even cite abolitionists as
historical precursors for contemporary human rights activists who
“promote change” by “reporting facts” to the international community.
But as I show with a careful reconstruction of the John L. Brown case,
there are several difficulties with this description of abolitionist
activism as a straightforward process of applying pressure by reporting
facts. First, newspaper reports about the trial were discrepant,
sometimes conflicting, often incomplete, and occasionally based on
erroneous information or misread by the intended audiences. Moreover,
the time lag between events in South Carolina and reportage about them
overseas meant that British abolitionists were often acting on
information that was already out of date by the time it reached them.
Indeed, while abolitionists proclaimed victory for their tactics when
Hammond pardoned Brown, it is likely that Hammond commuted Brown’s
sentence before reports of British protest ever reached him. Because of
these realities, many “non-facts” soon began circulating in
transatlantic print and abolitionist networks about the Brown case,
ranging from erroneous reports about whether Brown was a free man or a
slave to conjectures about the complexion of Hetty.

Instead of fitting our stories of transatlantic abolitionism into a
model of “promoting change” by “reporting facts” and thereby applying
pressure on target actors, it is important to recapture the highly
uneven and often bewildering flow of information back and forth across
the Atlantic. Depicting transatlantic abolitionism in this way at least
helps us make more sense, I think, of what happened in the Brown case.
First, the appearance of errors in abolitionist reportage is part of
what provoked Hammond and O’Neall to reply; it was not so much the
pressure applied on them by the reportage of facts that moved them to
speak out in their defense, thereby escalating the debate over slavery.
Instead, they seized the opportunity afforded them by the misinformation
introduced into the coverage of the case by time and circumstance. They
also made use of the fact that reports about the trial were so hard to
verify to introduce rumors about Brown’s true motives that hampered
abolitionists’ ability to rally public opinion about the case.

In the final sections of the paper, I turn to recent scholarship
highlighting the role of “rumor” in the grassroots politics of slaves
and argue that this scholarship can provide methodological resources to
historians of transatlantic activism as well. Many recent historians
have drawn attention to the importance of slaves’ “grapevine telegraph,”
or the information networks that they used to learn about opportunities
for escape and resistance. ([Steven Hahn][] and [Susan Eva O’Donovan][]
have recently provided brief introductions to this literature in the
*New York Times*.) Much of this literature is focused on showing what
was telegraph-like about the grapevine. Conversely, but in a
complementary way, my paper on transatlantic abolitionism and John L.
Brown attempts to show what was grapevine-like about telegraphs.

Again, [you can download the full paper I presented at CLAW here][I’m
posting the paper that I circulated for the conference]. I’m planning to
do additional research, revise this rough draft, and prepare this
article for print publication in one form or another. So I welcome
critical feedback about the piece, either here or by email. If you would
like to use the paper or cite it, please let me know.

  [The Case of John L. Brown]: http://www.samplereality.com/2012/05/02/notes-towards-a-deformed-humanities/
  [Carolina Lowcountry and the Atlantic World program]: http://spinner.cofc.edu/atlanticworld/?referrer=webcluster&
  [“Civil War–Global Conflict,”]: http://spinner.cofc.edu/atlanticworld/civilwar/index.html
  [I’m posting the paper that I circulated for the conference]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/37261
  [here’s how and why]: index.html%3Fp=75.html
  [*that* John Brown]: http://www2.iath.virginia.edu/jbrown/master.html
  [read all about the appeals trial right here]: http://books.google.com/books?id=Z6sKAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA129#v=onepage&q=&f=false
  [prompted Hammond to write what became a “proslavery classic,”]: http://books.google.com/books?id=29YtAAAAYAAJ&pg=PR4#v=onepage&q=&f=false
  [Activists Beyond Borders]: http://www.amazon.com/Activists-Beyond-Borders-Advocacy-International/dp/0801484561
  [Steven Hahn]: http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/12/what-lincoln-meant-to-the-slaves/
  [Susan Eva O’Donovan]: http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/18/william-webbs-world/
