% Dick Dowling and the Battle of Sabine Pass: The View from Emancipation Park
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% May 2, 2012

<div class="well">
This post contains the text of the lecture I delivered at the Houston
Museum of Natural Science on April 24 as part of its Distinguished
Lecture series on the Civil War. It draws on research done by myself and
my students as part of the Dick Dowling Digital Archive, which I
previously announced [here][]. Readers interested in seeing the primary
sources on which it was based should consult the [Dick Dowling and
Sabine Pass in History and Memory][] exhibit at Rice University. A
recording of the lecture is also available for streaming in [MP3
format][], and the slides used during the original lecture can be viewed
in [PDF][].
</div>

The Civil War is far away--generations away--from where we sit right
now. But measured in miles, the Civil War is not very far away at all,
even here in Houston.

Within three miles of this theater, in fact, there are two historic
markers about the Civil War. One marks the site where recently
emancipated slaves in Houston built a new tradition for commemorating
what they regarded as the chief legacy of the war. The other marks the
statue of a man whom many white Houstonians have long regarded as a
Civil War hero who saved their state from destruction. The stories I
want to tell tonight have to do with these two places, right in our
city's backyard. Think of this, then, as a tale of two sites.

The two sites I will talk about tonight tell very different stories
about the Civil War. Each represents strikingly different ways that
Houstonians in the past have remembered this conflict, and continue to
remember it today. So I'm first going to speak briefly about both of
their stories, noting where they differ. And then I'm going to discuss a
third way to understand the two sites in light of historical evidence
that both sites have neglected.

But let's start from where you are sitting right now. And let me begin
by taking you a few miles away and more than a century back in time to
the first of the two sites I'd like to discuss: Houston's Emancipation
Park.

About three miles directly behind you, not far from where Interstate-59
and Highway 288 join as the Eastex Freeway, there is a park whose
history dates back to 1872. In that year, a small group of Texans who
had been recently emancipated by the Civil War joined forces to purchase
the ten-acre plot now known as Emancipation Park. The fundraising for
this historic purchase was led by three formerly enslaved men. Two
African American churches, also made up of recently emancipated people,
provided most of the capital. And on July 10, 1872, a group of African
American men calling themselves the "Festival Association" purchased Lot
No. 25 for $800.[^1]

This was a considerable sum of money for people who had recently been
enslaved, so why did the trustees of the Festival Association make this
purchase? Their name provides the answer. The group wanted a place to
hold annual *festivals* marking their emancipation on days like
Juneteenth.

Juneteenth was important to African Americans in Houston and the
surrounding areas because it marked the date--June 19, 1865--when
General Gordon Granger publicly read presidential emancipation orders to
the citizens of Galveston. By the time the Festival Association
purchased its park in 1872, it was apparently already known as a place
where African Americans assembled publicly to celebrate this event. It
has continued to serve that function, off and on, ever since, and
eventually it took on the name Emancipation Park. About three
Juneteenths ago, in 2009, a plaque was unveiled at Emancipation Park to
mark this remarkable history.[^2]

That's the story *of* Emancipation Park, but what is the story that
Emancipation Park tells us *about* the Civil War? Once again, the answer
is in the name: the founders of Emancipation Park understood the Civil
War primarily as an engine of emancipation from slavery--an engine
without which slavery might have lasted much longer than it did.

Looking back now, it's easy to see why African Americans after the war
understood the war this way. In 1860, white Texans held approximately
185,000 people in human bondage, which was approximately one-third of
the state's total population. As the Civil War approached, slave prices
and the slave population were growing in the state, and by the end of
the war some historians estimate there were closer to a quarter million
enslaved people here, many of them concentrated in neighboring counties
like Fort Bend and Brazoria where there were more slaves than white
residents. With the state's agriculture booming and prominent Texans
discussing the possibility of reopening the African slave trade, there
were no signs that slavery was going to die a natural death in the
state.

There was also no sign, before the Civil War, that white Texans would
ever tolerate an *unnatural* death for slavery. For them, slavery itself
was *natural*, a divine institution justified by God and the laws of
racial hierarchy. Almost all white Texans considered buying and selling
"Negroes," as one Houston alderman named Edward Riordan did, to be as
natural and morally permissible as buying real estate. The secession
documents that Texans published in 1861 made these beliefs clear, and
declared that Texans would secede and fight a war before ever allowing
slavery to come to an end.

Given these facts, is it any wonder that African Americans in Houston
and elsewhere in Texas celebrated the arrival of Union officers like
Granger? Or that they wished to mark the epochal transformation wrought
by the end of the war? Every time men and women of color gathered in
Emancipation Park after 1872 to celebrate Juneteenth or hold community
events, they told a clear, unmistakable story about what the Civil War
meant to them: the war was significant because it brought an end to
slavery. The war enabled free people of color, who could not legally
live in Houston before the war, to purchase a park here, to celebrate
the death of what is often called the peculiar institution, and to
demonstrate their determination to create new institutions of their own.
Viewed from Emancipation Park, that's the most important legacy of the
Civil War in Texas: the arrival of emancipation.

Now let's return back here to the Museum and turn to the next Civil War
site in our backyard. This site is about one mile behind me on the other
side of Hermann Park. At the corner of Macgregor and Cambridge Street,
just across from the fifth green on the golf course, there is marker
about a dozen years older than the one at Emancipation Park. And it
stands next to the oldest piece of public statuary in Houston: a
thirty-foot-tall monument to Richard W. Dowling, the Irish American
Houstonian better known as Dick Dowling.

I'd wager that most people today don't really know much about Dowling,
or about this statue, unless perhaps you're from Sabine or went to
Dowling Middle School on the south side. (Certainly my golfing buddies
never do when we glimpse him through the trees.) It's easy to miss him
because it's hard to get a close look from the street without parking a
good walk away.

But that wasn't always the case. When this statue was first erected in
1905, it actually stood outside what was then City Hall in Market
Square. On the day it was unveiled, huge crowds of people turned out for
a parade and jostled to see the platform where Dowling's only daughter,
Annie, loosened the sheet covering the statue. On that day, the crowds
also heard speeches by the mayor of Houston and the governor of Texas.

What did Dowling do to garner such accolades and receive such a
prominent placement outside the city government? To answer that we need
to go back two years before the original "Juneteenth," when Dowling was
a Confederate junior officer in charge of a small group of fewer than 50
men known as the Davis Guards. In September 1863, Dowling and the Guards
helped to foil a Union landing attempt in the Battle of Sabine Pass, and
that's still his primary claim to fame.

Now if you grew up in Houston, you may know this battle's story well,
but I'll briefly tell it again: on September 8, 1863, four shallow Union
gunboats steamed from the Gulf of Mexico into Sabine Pass at the border
between Texas and Louisiana. They approached a small fort on the Texas
coast known as Fort Griffin. Dowling and his men were waiting for them
there, and when the smoke cleared, only two of the gunboats had steamed
back out of the Pass to safety. In less than an hour, Dick Dowling's men
used well-aimed cannon fire to disable the U.S.S. *Clifton* and the
U.S.S. *Sachem* quickly, killing many of the crew members on the two
ships and capturing almost all of the rest without suffering any
casualties of their own.[^3]

If all Dowling had done was repulse four gunboats, of course, there may
never have been a historical marker raised to his memory. But behind the
four gunboats, floating around the mouth of Sabine Pass, there were
about two dozen other Union boats from New Orleans carrying around 5,000
Union troops. The aim of this large fleet had been to land these troops
on the coast south of Dowling's position. From there, while the gunboats
weakened Dowling's position, the troops would move quickly to rail lines
that led straight to Houston.

Capturing Houston, Union forces might well have been able to capture all
of Confederate Texas in 1863, and if the troops had landed as planned,
they may well have done so. But things didn't go as planned. Instead of
landing the troops in advance of the naval attack on Dowling's position,
as originally planned, Union officers retreated once the first two
gunboats were sunk, without landing a single soldier. As a result, the
5,000 troops--whose numbers were sometimes later inflated to figures
like 10,000 or 15,000--were never really involved in the battle or even
came into range of Dowling's guns. But that didn't stop Texans from
celebrating what seemed a tremendous victory against overwhelming odds.
Overnight, the hasty retreat of Union forces made Dowling a legend who
had reputedly turned back thousands of Yankees with a few well-aimed
shots and a few dozen Irish brawlers. In the exhibit currently showing
upstairs, you can even see one of the medals that was presented by local
citizens to Dowling's men, known as the Davis Guards.[^4]

Those medals were perhaps the smallest tokens of the respect that Texans
and former Confederates paid to Dowling for years after the battle of
Sabine Pass. Here are a few others:

[At this point of the lecture I discussed some of the evidence presented
in the [Dowling's Story][] and [Dowling's Statue][] sections of the
Omeka exhibit at Rice, including Jefferson Davis's speech in 1882, the
presentation of a medal to Dowling's daughter in 1889, and the naming of
Dowling Street, which runs right by Emancipation Park, in 1892.]

Despite all this, Dowling's prominence in Houstonians' memory has also
declined over the years. (Remember my golfing buddies?) And the statue
itself gradually fell into disrepair in the twentieth century as it was
moved farther and farther away from the center of the city.

[Here I discussed the movement of the statue from City Hall to Hermann
Park, a story more fully told in the [Leaving City Hall][] section of
the Omeka exhibit.]

If you get out of the car, and read the historical marker, what you'll
see are also some of the more subtle changes that Dowling's memory has
undergone. Instead of leading with his Civil War exploits, the marker
begins with his business dealings and pays particular attention to his
Irish ancestry. [These themes are more fully explored, as well, in the
exhibit.]

But the story the marker tells about the Battle of Sabine Pass is also
pretty consistent with the story that has always been told. For example,
at the 1905 unveiling of the statue, the governor of Texas "pointed out
that the Confederate congress had specially passed resolutions
commenting upon the remarkable work of the little band of men under
Dowling." The current historical marker does the same. Pretty much every
telling of the Dowling story in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
told it as story of heroic triumph against long odds. The current marker
does, too.[^5]

Yet perhaps the most remarkable and important fact about the Dowling
story over the last one hundred and fifty years are not the themes it
has always included, but rather the issues and facts that have always
been conspicuous in their absence. In particular, let's go back for a
moment to Emancipation Park, and see what the Dowling statue looks like
from there.

Remember that Houstonians who purchased and established Emancipation
Park told a clear story about the Civil War: that it had brought
emancipation. But the story that has almost always been told in the
shadow of Dick Dowling's statue does not mention slavery or emancipation
at all. In fact, the marker doesn't really say anything about the
reasons for the war, about Dowling's reasons for fighting, or about the
consequences of his victory. And it certainly doesn't point out that the
battle of Sabine Pass was fought after the Emancipation Proclamation, or
that the victory Dowling won had anything to do with the timing of
events like Juneteenth that were so celebrated at Emancipation Park. A
visitor to the Dowling statue can leave there without having any idea
about the story of military emancipation told just across 288.

Between these two markers, then, stands a distance greater than the
approximately four or five miles that separates them. On the one hand is
a marker that makes no mention of slavery, emancipation, or the causes
and results of the Civil War. On the other hand is a marker that picks
up its story in 1865, two years after the Battle of Sabine Pass.
Perhaps, in the end, this tale of two sites really is a tale of two
cities: two different groups of Houstonians who have, for over one
hundred years, emphasized very different stories of the Civil War.

Which marker, which site, has the story right? The answer, as with most
markers, is that neither marker tells the whole story. (What marker
*could* tell the whole story?) But the only way to see what *both*
stories overlook is to look more closely at the Battle of Sabine Pass.

Now, this battle, as we have seen, has almost always been remembered
from the viewpoint of Dowling and his men, and from that view, it's hard
to say anything about the battle without talking about things like
Dowling's bravery and tactical achievements. But for the next several
minutes, let me consider, with you, a question that has not usually been
asked about Sabine Pass: how does the battle look from Emancipation
Park? Does it confirm the belief of the park's founders that the course
of the war and the future of slavery were inextricably linked? Or have
the stories about Dowling failed to mention slavery and emancipation
because, perhaps, this was simply an exceptional battle where the
general rule--that the war was a struggle over slavery--somehow failed
to apply?

Those are big questions. So to answer them, I'm going to call on the
help of two figures who were involved in the Battle of Sabine Pass,
directly or indirectly, whose names were *not* Dowling, and show you a
little bit about what they said or experienced about the battle. Each of
these two men are probably less familiar to most Houstonians than either
Dowling or Emancipation Park--but if we listen closely to what they have
to tell us, they can help us hear part of what has been missing from the
stories of both of the sites we have visited tonight.

The first character I'd like to introduce was, indeed, a character: John
Bankhead Magruder. Magruder was the Confederate Major General in charge
of Texas when the Battle of Sabine Pass was fought. He was also,
according to some reports, something of a dandy and lady's man. He liked
to dance, was known to be a "great talker" and witty conversationalist,
and was sometimes referred to as "Prince John Magruder." Born in
Virginia, Magruder also once referred to the Puritans who settled New
England as "*that pestiferous crew of the Mayflower*," a statement that
would have accentuated his lisp.[^6]

There was, however, no doubting Magruder's seriousness as an officer. A
career army man who had fought in the Mexican American War, Magruder
arrived in Texas in November 1862 and immediately took charge of a
situation that did not look good for the Confederacy. Union forces had
managed to capture Galveston the month before, so Magruder's first order
of business was to launch a successful, nighttime attack on the island
on New Year's Eve which managed to recapture the important port for the
Confederacy.

But Magruder's victory was also a narrow one, saved at the last minute
by some cotton-clad steamers. And Magruder also determined, after
recapturing Galveston, that the fortifications along the coast were
insufficient to prevent another Union assult. His next step, therefore,
was to spend most of 1863 building a complex system of fortifications in
Galveston and along the coast, including the small installation--Fort
Griffin--that Dowling defended later that year when the Union forces, as
expected, did return.

Fortifying the coast was so important to Magruder that he also took what
proved to be an unpopular step among the local slaveholding residents of
the Houston area: he began to force slaveholders to send their slaves to
labor on the fortifications. He created a special bureau for this
purpose, and although many slaveholders resisted, he threatened to deal
with resisters according to military law. In the end, several thousand
slaves were forced to work on the fortifications in Galveston, and about
500 slaves were impressed to build Dowling's well-designed fort at
Sabine Pass.[^7]

When slaveholders complained about the conscription of their slaves for
these projects, Magruder--ever quick with sharp witticisms--had a good
answer. Consider, for example, [the letter that Magruder wrote to
Francis Lubbock][], then Governor of Texas, in June 1863. With wry
understatement, Magruder noted that "a mere inspection of the map should
satisfy any holder of slave property that these defenses are absolutely
necessary to its security."

What did a mere inspection of the map tell Magruder? The first thing it
told him was that Union forces were getting closer and closer to
overtaking the Mississippi Valley. But he also understood that by 1863,
wherever the Union army was going, it was destabilizing slavery.

[Here I briefly recounted the history of wartime emancipation during the
Civil War, noting especially the recent passage of the Second
Confiscation Act and the announcement of the Preliminary Emancipation
Proclamation shortly before Magruder arrived in Texas. I also mentioned
evidence that refugee planters from Louisiana were bringing slaves into
east Texas in 1863 on the understanding that if they remained near Union
lines, the security of their property was in doubt. Finally, I pointed
audience members to the recently released [Visualizing Emancipation
project][] at the University of Richmond to illustrate the effects that
the war was having on slavery in the region.]

In short, Magruder understood quite well that another victory by Union
forces in Galveston or Sabine Pass directly threatened the security of
slavery in Texas. Here I returned to the letter to the Governor of Texas
that Magruder wrote to demonstrate his understanding that an invasion by
Union forces in Texas would lead to the liberation of slaves.]

The second non-Dowling figure I'd like to tell you about got an even
closer look at the action at Sabine Pass, and understood the stakes of
the battle with far more immediacy than a map could ever provide. But
I'll warn you in advance that we don't know nearly as much about this
man as we do about Magruder. He left us no writings or witticisms, and I
don't have a picture of him to show you. His name, I have, and it's easy
to remember: George Houston. But even this tantalizing piece of
information is uncertain, and the name is spelled in different ways in
the records.

The reason why there is so much uncertainty about George W. Houston is
that he was, until sometime before September 1863, enslaved. But what I
can tell you is that George Houston was present at the Battle of Sabine
Pass, and probably participated in the combat.

[Here I discussed the material that is covered in the [From Slaves to
Sailors][] section of the Omeka exhibit, focusing especially on [the
casualty report][] that mentions the presence of George Houston and
other "contraband" on Union gunboats during the battle.]

The presence of these black men and contraband slaves at the Battle of
Sabine Pass raises at least three questions. The first two that occur to
me are these: How did men like George Houston get involved in the
battle? And what happened to those who went missing there?

In George Houston's case, the first of these questions is harder to
answer than the second, but we can take some educated guesses based on
the evidence we have.

[Here I discussed how "contraband" slaves may have made their way aboard
the *Clifton* and *Sachem* before the battle, paying special attention
to the diary kept by Henry O. Gusley. This diary documents the effects
of Union naval recruitment strategies in the region and the large number
of "contraband" slaves who came aboard the *Clifton* while it was still
operating in Louisiana earlier in 1863. An excellent annotated edition
of the diary has been published by Edward T. Cotham, Jr., as *The
Southern Journey of a Civil War Marine: The Illustrated Note-Book of
Henry O. Gusley* (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2006), available on
[Amazon][]. Also see Joseph P. Reidy's "Black Men in Navy Blue during
the Civil War," available [online][].]

The enslaved men who somehow found their way to ships like the *Clifton*
took this step at tremendous risk, not just because of the dangers of
combat. Several black men on board the *Harriet Lane*, a Union vessel
captured in the Battle of Galveston earlier that year, appear to have
been reenslaved after being captured and brought to a prison in Houston.
But what happened to George Houston?

[Here I discussed the evidence that George Houston survived the battle
and made it aboard the U.S.S. *Arizona*, later enlisting in the Union
Navy. This story is more fully discussed in the [From Slaves to
Sailors][] section of the Omeka exhibit.]

Earlier I said that George Houston's presence at Sabine Pass raises
three questions. We've looked at how he may have gotten there, and at
what may have happened to him after he went missing. Let me conclude my
remarks tonight by considering a third question: Should the story of
George W. Houston change the way we remember the city of Houston's most
famous battle?

Well, that's a question you'll have to answer for yourself. But I think
that Magruder and Houston together tell us two important things about
the Battle of Sabine Pass that are easy to miss if you only visit the
public sites here in our city that remember the Civil War. First of all,
Magruder clearly understood that battles like the ones fought at Sabine
Pass to protect Texas from invasion were also battles that helped to
defend slavery and the interests of the state's slaveholding residents.
Local records from after the battle show that slaveholding residents in
Texas certainly did not become less anxious when they found out about
the huge fleet of Union boats that had been floating in the Gulf of
Mexico before Dowling turned them away. One Confederate officer, P. N.
Luckett, wrote from Houston only a few weeks after Dowling's battle,
reporting to his superior about a trip he had just made to the area
around Velasco. He pointed out that white residents there were concerned
about Union invasion because of "the precarious tenure" of their "negro
property" in the event of Texas's fall.

Sources like this make it impossible to see the Battle of Sabine Pass as
a battle that had *nothing* to do with slavery and emancipation,
whatever the absence surrounding these topics in the memory of Dick
Dowling may imply. On the other hand, the story of George W. Houston
also complicates the story that African Americans celebrated after the
Civil War at places like Emancipation Park. Juneteenth, after all, was a
holiday that celebrated emancipation as a product of the *end* of the
war that didn't really come until June 19, 1865. But people like George
W. Houston and the other unnamed African American men like him who were
present at Sabine Pass show us that African Americans in Texas,
Louisiana, and the surrounding area weren't all waiting on General
Gordon Granger to take steps, even dangerous ones, to pursue their own
freedom.

[^1]: For more information about the purchase of Emancipation Park,
    consult the "Protected Landmark Designation Report" prepared by the
    City of Houston and [hosted in PDF form here][]. The report is
    discussed in a *Houston Chronicle* [blog post][] about the erection
    of a historical marker at the site in 2009.

[^2]: Images of the unveiling of the historical marker can be found on
    the Houston Parks and Recreation Department page for [Emancipation
    Park][].

[^3]: For a full account of the battle, consult Edward T. Cotham, Jr.,
    *Sabine Pass: The Confederacy's Thermopylae* (Austin: University of
    Texas Press, 2004), available on [Amazon][1].

[^4]: This lecture was delivered while the [Discovering the Civil War][]
    exhibit from the National Archives was showing at the museum, along
    with selected items from the John L. Nau III Civil War Collection,
    which includes one of the Davis Guard medals. An image of the medal
    being exhibited at the museum as part of an earlier exhibit can be
    found on [Flickr][].

[^5]: The text of the marker can be found [here][2] as part of the Dick
    Dowling Digital Archive, and the report of the governor's speech can
    be found in a newspaper article covering the unveiling of the
    statue, also available [here][3].

[^6]: See Thomas W. Cutrer, s.v., "Magruder, John Bankhead," in *The
    Handbook of Texas Online*,
    <http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/fma15>. The
    quote about the Mayflower can be found in Arthur J. Fremantle,
    *Three Months in the Southern States* (Mobile: S. H. Goetzel, 1864),
    online at <http://docsouth.unc.edu/imls/fremantle/fremantle.html>.

[^7]: For more information, see the [Freedom's Frontier][] and [Forced
    Labor at Sabine Pass][] sections of the Omeka exhibit.

  [here]: announcing-dick-dowling-archive.html
  [Dick Dowling and Sabine Pass in History and Memory]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling
  [MP3 format]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/826
  [PDF]: /pdf/dowling-slides.pdf
  [Dowling's Story]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/afterlives-of-dick-dowling/2
  [Dowling's Statue]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/afterlives-of-dick-dowling/3
  [Leaving City Hall]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/afterlives-of-dick-dowling/4
  [the letter that Magruder wrote to Francis Lubbock]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/755
  [Visualizing Emancipation project]: http://dsl.richmond.edu/emancipation/
  [From Slaves to Sailors]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/slavery-and-sabine-pass/5
  [the casualty report]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/773
  [Amazon]: http://www.amazon.com/The-Southern-Journey-Civil-Marine/dp/0292726007/
  [online]: http://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2001/fall/black-sailors-1.html
  [hosted in PDF form here]: http://blog.chron.com/bayoucityhistory/files/legacy/EmancipationPark3018DowlingStreetR.pdf
  [blog post]: http://blog.chron.com/bayoucityhistory/2009/06/marker-dedication-at-emancipation-park/
  [Emancipation Park]: http://www.houstontx.gov/parks/ourparks/emancipationpark.html
  [1]: http://www.amazon.com/Sabine-Pass-Confederacys-Thermopylae-Caldwell/dp/0292705948
  [Discovering the Civil War]: http://www.archives.gov/exhibits/civil-war/
  [Flickr]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/hmns/6073753379/
  [2]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/381
  [3]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/454
  [Freedom's Frontier]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/slavery-and-sabine-pass/3
  [Forced Labor at Sabine Pass]: http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/slavery-and-sabine-pass/4
