% In Which I Digitally Archive Some Articles
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% September 20, 2010 

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my blog as [Post the Fourth, In
Which I Digitally Archive Some Articles][].
</div>

Several months ago, I learned about Rice University’s [Digital
Scholarship Archive][], an institutional repository where faculty
members can store and share published and unpublished work online. Many
universities now have such repositories, including the [University of
Michigan][], [Johns Hopkins][], and others. But as Shane Landrum
([@cliotropic][]) recently suggested, I’m not sure history faculty are
widely aware of these repositories. I know that without a tip from the
great Lisa Spiro ([@lisaspiro][]), I might not have learned of Rice’s
DSA at all. But I’m glad I did, and here’s why and how I’ve posted some
of my published work to the repository.

For me the advantages of putting my work online in this way are clear.
One benefit is curatorial. By putting my work here I can be sure that
professional librarians will regularly back up my files, as well as
convert documents to newer file formats when old ones become
obsolescent. Without any maintenance from me, I will know that my online
scholarly works will have permanent URLs, ensuring that anyone wishing
to use them can rely on a working link.

But the greatest benefit here is that I can provide more open access to
many of my publications, which otherwise would hide in subscription-only
databases like [JSTOR][] and [Project Muse][]. I can also provide copies
of unpublished work like conference papers. Indeed, once deposited on
the repository, such papers no longer become “unpublished” work. And
this means that the work and research put into conference papers can be
shared widely. I can solicit feedback and critiques of the works long
after a conference has closed while simultaneously ensuring that my
authorship is documented and in the public record.

That’s why I’ve decided to make use of the DSA. And here’s how I did it.

The process of putting my conference papers online was [straightforward
enough once I received an account on the repository][]. (To read these
instructions, Rice faculty will need to log in.) I didn’t need to ask
anyone’s permission to publish those. But in order to find out which
published journal articles I have the right to put online, I had to do a
very modest amount of additional investigation.

First, I browsed over to [SHERPA/RoMEO][]. This is basically an online
database of publishers’ policies concerning reproduction and copyright;
it’s as easy as typing in a journal’s name to find out where its
publisher stands on the digital archiving of articles. You can use
[SHERPA’s “color coded” key][] to get a quick sense of what rights a
particular publisher gives to an author, but it’s best to closely read
the restrictions each journal places on archiving or, better yet, to
click through any link that is provided to the press’s own policy page.
Some publishers allow the archiving of an author’s pre-print or
post-print version of an article (i.e., a Microsoft Word or PDF version
of the submitted manuscript), while others allow the archiving of an
actual PDF file of the published article, with the copy-editing and
formatting done by the press. And various journals attach restrictions
to these permissions.

For example, by searching for the *Journal of the Early Republic* on
RoMEO, I learned that I could put the Publisher’s Version/PDF of an
article in Rice’s DSA, so long as I waited until 12 months after the
article appeared and so long as I honored the Press’s request to credit
them for the original publication. By clicking through the link provided
to the University of Pennsylvania Press’s [own page on its archive
policies][], I also found a set copyright notice that I was required to
attach to the archived work. ([Click here][] to see an image of what
this actually looked like on RoMEO.)

I also learned that another article I published in *American Quarterly*
could probably be put up, but that I should contact the publisher to
check. I sent an email and heard back the next day that I could post it,
along with a credit. I think it’s also a good idea (and a courtesy) to
confirm RoMEO’s results by emailing even those publishers who don’t
require an email, so I also wrote the JER to make sure I was reading the
policy correctly. I easily found the relevant email addresses on both
journals’ homepages, and it was also reassuring that [the JER’s
homepage][] contained a link to the same Press policies on
“Self-Archiving and Digital Repositories” linked to by RoMEO.

In short, faculty interested in using Rice’s repository should not
regard difficulty of use as a barrier; the couple of questions I had
were quickly answered by librarians and/or RoMEO and my publishers. One
additional thing I learned is that to make these links available to
people off campus, the “https” in the URL needs to be changed to “http.”
But now, with just a little bit of work, I have two of my published
articles, my dissertation (which I have the copyright to), and most of
my conference papers available on the DSA. Click on the link below to
see the list:

Published, Peer-Reviewed Articles:

“Repealing Unions: American Abolitionists, Irish Repeal, and the Origins
of Garrisonian Disunionism,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 28, no. 2
(2008), 243-269 ([download][])

“The Fourth and the First: Abolitionist Holidays, Respectability, and
Radical Interracial Reform,” *American Quarterly* 57, no. 1 (2005),
129-151 ([download][1])

My Dissertation:

“Our Country is the World: Radical American Abolitionists Abroad,” Ph.D
diss., Johns Hopkins University, 2006 ([download][2])

Conference Papers:

“What Counts as Radical Abolitionism? A Reconsideration of Recent
Scholarship,” [OAH][] Annual Meeting, Seattle, March 26-28, 2009
([download][3])

“Repealing Unions: American Abolitionists, Irish Repealers, and the
Coming of the Civil War, 1842-1847,” [AHA][] Annual Meeting,
Philadelphia, January 5-8, 2006 ([download][4])

“Our Country is the World: American Abolitionists, Louis Kossuth and
Philanthropic Revolutions,” [OAH][] Annual Meeting, Boston, March 25-28,
2004 ([download][5])

“Haiti’s Usable Past: Violence, Anglophilia, and Antebellum American
Abolitionists,” [OIEAHC][] Ninth Annual Conference, New Orleans, June
6-8, 2003 ([download][6])

  [Post the Fourth, In Which I Digitally Archive Some Articles]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=75
    "Permanent Link: Post the Fourth, In Which I Digitally Archive Some Articles"
  [Digital Scholarship Archive]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/
  [University of Michigan]: http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/55467/browse?type=dateissued&submit_browse=By+Date
  [Johns Hopkins]: https://jscholarship.library.jhu.edu/
  [@cliotropic]: http://twitter.com/cliotropic/status/21352071993
  [@lisaspiro]: http://twitter.com/lisaspiro
  [JSTOR]: http://www.jstor.org
  [Project Muse]: http://muse.jhu.edu
  [straightforward enough once I received an account on the repository]:
    https://owlspace-ccm.rice.edu/access/wiki/site/91656f53-9adf-45c4-000e-b5072d163d17/faq.html#howto
  [SHERPA/RoMEO]: http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/
  [SHERPA’s “color coded” key]: http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeoinfo.html#colours
  [own page on its archive policies]: http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/about/archivepolicy.html
  [Click here]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/files/2010/09/sherparomeo.jpg
  [the JER’s homepage]: http://jer.pennpress.org/strands/jer/home.htm
  [download]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27612
  [1]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27613
  [2]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27492
  [OAH]: http://www.oah.org
  [3]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27611
  [AHA]: http://www.historians.org
  [4]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27608
  [5]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27609
  [OIEAHC]: http://oieahc.wm.edu/
  [6]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27610
