% The Digital Early Republic
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% April 7, 2011

<div class="well">
This page was originally published on my old blog as [The Digital Early
Republic][].
</div>

It may still be the case that historians, as a whole, are [averse to
using databases of digitized primary sources in their research][]. My
impression is that this is rapidly changing, however. This impression is
admittedly unscientific and based only on the scholarship that I read.
My perceptions may also be skewed by the fact that I myself have found
digital databases useful in my research, as illustrated by [my last
post][] on a Lincoln quote and my previous series on [John Brown’s
Timbuctoo][].

Still, in at least one field–the history of the early American
republic–there is lots of evidence that scholars already see digital
databases as crucial to their research. Recent historians of the early
republic even seem eager to deploy keyword searches and share their
digital findings. In this post, I’ll illustrate what I mean by citing
some recent examples of how historians in my field are using proprietary
digital databases.

For the past year or so I’ve been keeping an incomplete but running list
of articles in the [*Journal of the Early Republic*][] (the official
journal of [SHEAR][]) that make explicit use of proprietary databases
published by companies like [ProQuest][], [NewsBank][] and [Accessible
Archives][]. By sharing these examples, I hope to provide a quick
snapshot of some of the actual practices of historians who use digital
databases, particularly historians who don’t seem to identify primarily
with the field of digital history or digital humanities. Finally, at the
end of the post, I’ll explain why I think historians in my field could
benefit from a central online repository that makes information about
these databases accessible and keeps track of differences among them.

In many ways, historians of the early nineteenth century are in the best
position to exploit digitized primary sources. Copyright laws being what
they are, most of the full-view books available on [Google Books][] fall
in our period. Database companies have also been extremely successful at
digitizing nineteenth-century newspapers and ephemera. Important
historical collections that once existed on microfilm now exist in
digital form thanks to proprietary databases like ProQuest’s [American
Periodical Series Online][] and Readex’s [Archive of Americana][]. Given
the availability of such collections at many academic libraries, it’s
not surprising that historians of the early republic have begun using
these databases and citing them in their work.

Within the pages of the *Journal of the Early Republic*, the use of such
databases has so far run the gamut from casual mentions of keyword
search results to more ambitious efforts to build arguments around such
results.

Examples of the more casual references include John L. Brooke’s 2008
presidential address to SHEAR, [“Cultures of Nationalism, Movements of
Reform.”][] After a paragraph arguing that “prayers by a local minister
seemed almost universal” at celebrations of the Fourth of July and
Washington’s Birthday, Brooke included a footnote stating that “my
comments on religion and national celebration are based on the results
of searches in Early American Newspapers and Gale 19th Century United
States Newpapers databases.” The year before Brooke’s address was
published, [Caroline Winterer’s introduction][] to the *Journal*’s
Spring 2008 roundtable on Mary Kelley’s book *Learning to Stand and
Speak* also included a passing reference to results of a keyword search,
but with more specific information about the search performed and the
results. After noting the previous scholarly neglect of Kelley’s
topic–female academies in the early republic–Winterer wrote that
“numbers alone can show that this neglect of the female academies is
entirely undeserved. Search the term female academy in the hundreds of
American magazines that make up the American Periodicals Series online
database and you retrieve exactly 1,131 hits for the period 1790–1860.”
Similarly, an endnote in Daniel A. Cohen’s Spring 2010 article [“Making
Hero Strong”][] noted that “a keyword search of the phrase ‘story paper’
in ProQuest’s American Periodical Series Online 1740–1900 suggests that
the term had entered into common usage by the late 1850s, if not
earlier.”

In each of these cases, Brooke, Winterer, and Cohen used “hits” to back
up points that were secondary to their arguments. But recent issues of
the *Journal of the Early Republic* have also included several articles
that make more extensive use of proprietary databases. Here’s a run-down
of examples:

-   In 2008, [Carol Lasser][] analyzed language in antislavery
    newspapers to show that around 1840 there was a steep decline in the
    “sexualized imagery” of slavery that abolitionists had used
    frequently between 1834 and 1839. Using keyword searches in a subset
    of newspapers available in the American Periodical Series Online,
    Lasser identified the number of instances in which the words
    “*rape*, *ravish*, *amalgamation*, *adultery*, and the truncated
    *licentious*” appeared in the same paragraph as *slave* (and in the
    same article as either *United States* or *America*). She then
    displayed her results on a graph, with numbers of hits on a y-axis
    and years on an x-axis. After using this and two related graphs to
    demonstrate the “dramatic rise and subsequent decline” of such
    language, Lasser connected this pattern to contemporaneous changes
    in abolitionist strategy and the roles that women played within the
    abolitionist movement.
-   In 2009, [Mark Schmeller][] included a similar graph at the
    beginning of an article on the partisan origins and uses of the term
    “public opinion” in the 1790s. To demonstrate that in the 1790s a
    “chorus of newspaper writers … had just begun to fortify their
    arguments with references to public opinion,” Schmeller performed a
    keyword search of “public opinion” in the database Early American
    Newspapers, Series I, published by Readex. He then graphed the
    results with occurrences per 100 publications on the y-axis and
    years on the x-axis. For Schmeller’s argument, this timing of the
    uptick in occurrences was important to his larger argument that
    discourse about the meaning of “public opinion” was shaped by
    debates over political economy and public finance occurring at the
    same time.
-   In 2009, [Amanda Bowie Moniz][] performed searches in a few titles
    in Readex’s America’s Historical Newspapers for instances of the
    word *drowned* in order to find and catalog instances of drowning in
    the 1770s and 1780s. These results became one part of her argument
    that the rise of increasingly cosmopolitan humane societies for the
    resuscitation of drowning victims were not driven primarily or only
    by an increase in drowning incidents.
-   Also in 2009, [Nathan Kozuskanich][] made a forceful argument for
    the significance of digital research methods by suggesting that they
    can help settle legal disputes about the “original intent” of the
    Second Amendment. Kozuskanich searched for the exact phrase “bear
    arms” in a range of years in Readex’s digital version of the famous
    Evans bibliography of early American documents, in Readex’s Early
    American Historical Newspapers, and in the Library of Congress’s
    U.S. Congressional Debates database. In the combined results from
    all of these searches, which turned up almost 400 relevant hits,
    only about a dozen documents “do not use an explicitly military
    context when discussing bearing arms,” undermining the
    individual-rights interpretation of the Second Amendment’s original
    intent. Kozuskanich then went on to argue that close reading of his
    results also showed weaknesses in both of the understandings of the
    amendment’s original intent that prevail today.
-   Again in 2009–a banner year for keyword searching in the
    *Journal*–[Matthew Rainbow Hale][] used searches in Readex’s
    America’s Historical Newspapers to argue that “even after the
    increase in newspapers is taken into account, [temporal and
    journalistic] key words and phrases–including ‘millennium,’
    “accelerated,’ and ‘rumor’–appeared more frequently between 1793 and
    1795 than in two other eras (1774–77 and 1787–89).” Hale provided a
    table that listed the searches he performed on separate rows. Each
    column, headed with years, gave figures “representing the number of
    references” to the word or phrase “divided by the number of
    newspapers in the Readex database published during the selected
    years,” rounded to “the nearest thousandth.” He then used this
    evidence as part of a larger argument that the radicalization of the
    French Revolution in these years “generated a new level of anxiety
    [in the United States] regarding political time and news.”

Now, one could probably enumerate other recent examples of historians of
the early republic using these and other digital databases. And it may
be foolhardy to generalize about a set of articles as diverse in method
and argument as these.

But two things strike me as I look over these cases:

First, it’s clear that many historians are not only using proprietary
databases, but also wish to embrace the opportunities that the *scale*
of each database make possible. Given the number of heated discussions
in some other fields about whether text mining is a legitimate way of
“reading” texts, it’s noteworthy that in each of the cases of above, the
data is presented without much wringing of the hands. To be sure, many
of the articles listed here are conscientious about mentioning the
limits of their methods and heading off objections to their samples and
searches. While Winterer described the 1,131 hits she found for the term
*female academy* as an “extraordinary harvest,” she also admitted that
this was a “crude measuring device.” Lasser provided additional analyses
of her data to offset possible objections that changes in the number of
abolitionist publications did not account for the patterns she was
finding. Moniz explained her choice of the search term *drowned* by
explaining that her own comprehensive survey of a New York newspaper not
included in her digital search results revealed that most reports of
drowning incidents used that phrase. Kozuskanich admitted that his
numbers did not take into account the appearance of his search term
multiple times in the same document. Each article also combined
arguments made from keyword searches with more traditional close
readings of documentary sources.

Even these qualifications and concessions, however, can be seen as
indicators of a general optimism among the authors about the utility and
defensibility of looking for quantitative patterns in digital databases.
Historians are eagerly venturing into this new digital age without
feeling like it means they have to leave old methods behind.

Yet It’s equally clear that historians have not yet developed clear-cut
conventions for describing their searches, citing the databases used,
and reporting their results. In these cases, URLs meant to point to the
homepages of the proprietary databases sometimes included the “ezproxy”
suffixes included in these URLs by their home universities. Perhaps more
significantly, the articles employ multiple conventions for formatting
search terms. Occasionally the search terms were italicized, while in
one instance (Schmeller’s “public opinion”) they were placed in quotes.
My initial impression as I compiled this list was that single word
search terms were always italicized, while phrases were put in quotes,
but some two-word phrases were italicized without quotes.

Except when the author specified that the search was for “the exact
phrase,” these formatting conventions could sometimes leave unclear, at
first glance, whether searches for two words were Boolean searches
(*United* AND *States*) or exact phrase searches made with
database-specific delimiters (“United States”). Given that the default
settings for searches in different databases treat Boolean and delimited
phrases differently, knowing exactly how terms were inputted will
probably be important to many readers of these articles. There was also
some variation in the way truncated terms were represented; in Hale’s
table, for example, one of the search terms listed is *false report(s)*,
but it is unclear whether the results on this line include the combined
results of two searches (for *false report* and then *false reports*) or
a search for *false report* which thereby included, according to
database-specific conventions, all instances of the pluralized phrase as
well. There was also no uniform convention for how to cite the
proprietary database or its publisher (which was in two cases left out).
And last but not least, while Hale provided the month and year in which
he performed his searches, other authors did not.

To illustrate the stakes involved in these seemingly slight differences,
consider Winterer’s use of a search for the term *female academy*.
Today, when I performed a search for *female academy* in the American
Periodical Series Online, limiting the search to the period between
1/1/1790 and 12/31/1860, I retrieved 1,435 hits–around 300 more than
Winterer reported. I also got a different number of hits if I searched
only in “document text” and not in “citation and document text.” In this
example, I tried my search for *female academy* both with and without
quotations around the phrase and got the same number of hits. But when I
performed the two searches (*female academy* and “female academy”) on
America’s Historical Newspapers, published by Readex, I got over 100,000
results for one and less than 10,000 for the other.

Winterer’s point is not significantly changed by a difference of 300
hits, but other arguments might be impacted by such variations. And
these variations are important primarily because they present
difficulties to a reader wishing to evaluate articles that use keyword
searches.

If these articles do indicate a trend towards such methods among
historians, that means that all historians–whether they use such methods
themselves or not–will increasingly be placed in a position of needing
to review and evaluate such methods. I see this as a good thing, but one
problem I foresee for historians is the difficulty of keeping track of
differences between databases. To evaluate search results–especially
when an argument rides on differences between relatively small numbers
of hits–it will become increasingly important to know specific features
of databases that may not always be reported by authors: do default
searches include [“fuzzy” hits][]? is the text being searched created by
Optical Character Recognition or human transcription? how many sources
does the database include, and over what chronological and geographical
range? how often is the corpus changed or updated, if at all?

To address some of these issues, Lasser’s endnotes helpfully provided a
link to [general information][] about the American Periodical Series
provided by ProQuest. But this convention, too, was not uniform across
the examples I’ve surveyed here. In these articles, and probably in
future ones, it will fall to readers to seek out relevant information
about the databases themselves. But such a search is not easy or
intuitive, given that different database companies present the
information in different ways, on different pages, and with differing
degrees of transparency. My rough sense from perusing pages like the one
linked above is that companies’ descriptions of their products are
usually aimed more at buyers than at users. Likewise, comparisons of
databases that can currently be found on the open web are written by
librarians and purchasers interested in getting their money’s worth.
Where does that leave the historian who instead wants to evaluate search
results being used as evidence for historical arguments?

This is one of the questions I’m hoping to be able to talk about at
[THATCamp Texas][] next week. More specifically, I’m wondering whether
it might be useful and feasible to create some resource that compiles
relevant information about the proprietary databases historians use most
so that readers (and also writers) can quickly get a sense of the lay of
the land at a particular database. What I’m imagining is something like
a [SHERPA/Romeo site][], but geared towards the description of search
functions and interfaces instead of copyright policies. The aim of such
a site would **not** be to shut down digital methods like the ones
employed in these articles or serve as a gatekeeper for publication. On
the contrary, I think such a site would make historians more comfortable
with such methods and would help build on the existing momentum towards
their use. Such a site would be useful to authors and researchers as
well as readers, I suspect. But does such a site exist? What information
would make such a site be useful? What costs and problems would be
involved in building one? How might it be pitched so as to *encourage*,
rather than *discourage* keyword searching?

**Works Cited**

John L. Brooke, “Cultures of Nationalism, Movements of Reform, and the
Composite–Federal Polity: From Revolutionary Settlement to Antebellum
Crisis,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 29.1 (2009): 1-33 **§**
Caroline Winterer. “Women and Civil Society: Introduction,” *Journal of
the Early Republic* 28.1 (2008): 23-28 **§** Daniel A. Cohen, “Making
Hero Strong: Teenage Ambition, Story-Paper Fiction, and the Generational
Recasting of American Women’s Authorship,” *Journal of the Early
Republic* 30.1 (2010): 85-136 **§** Carol Lasser, “Voyeuristic
Abolitionism: Sex, Gender, and the Transformation of Antislavery
Rhetoric,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 28.1 (2008): 83-114 **§**
Mark Schmeller, “The Political Economy of Opinion: Public Credit and
Concepts of Public Opinion in the Age of Federalism,” *Journal of the
Early Republic* 29.1 (2009): 35-61 **§** Amanda Bowie Moniz, “Saving the
Lives of Strangers: Humane Societies and the Cosmopolitan Provision of
Charitable Aid,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 29.4 (2009): 607-640
**§** Nathan Kozuskanich, “Originalism in a Digital Age: An Inquiry into
the Right to Bear Arms,” Journal of the Early Republic 29.4 (2009):
585-606 **§** Matthew Rainbow Hale, “On Their Tiptoes: Political Time
and Newspapers during the Advent of the Radicalized French Revolution,
circa 1792–1793,” Journal of the Early Republic 29.2 (2009): 191-218.

  [The Digital Early Republic]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=150
    "Permanent Link: The Digital Early Republic"
  [averse to using databases of digitized primary sources in their
  research]: http://tedunderwood.wordpress.com/2011/02/06/why-search-was-the-killer-app-in-text-mining-and-what-we-might-learn-from-it/#comments
  [my last post]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=126
  [John Brown’s Timbuctoo]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=46
  [*Journal of the Early Republic*]: http://jer.pennpress.org/
  [SHEAR]: http://www.shear.org/
  [ProQuest]: http://www.proquest.com
  [NewsBank]: http://www.newsbank.com/
  [Accessible Archives]: http://www.accessible.com/
  [Google Books]: http://books.google.com
  [American Periodical Series Online]: http://www.proquest.com/en-US/catalogs/databases/detail/aps.shtml
  [Archive of Americana]: http://www.readex.com/readex/?content=93
  [“Cultures of Nationalism, Movements of Reform.”]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v029/29.1.brooke.html
  [Caroline Winterer’s introduction]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v028/28.1winterer.html
  [“Making Hero Strong”]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v030/30.1.cohen01.html
  [Carol Lasser]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v028/28.1lasser.html
  [Mark Schmeller]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v029/29.1.schmeller.html
  [Amanda Bowie Moniz]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v029/29.4.moniz.html
  [Nathan Kozuskanich]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v029/29.4.kozuskanich.html
  [Matthew Rainbow Hale]: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_the_early_republic/v029/29.2.hale.html
  [“fuzzy” hits]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approximate_string_matching
  [general information]: http://training.proquest.com.ezproxy.rice.edu/trc/splash/aps/about_general.html
  [THATCamp Texas]: http://texas2011.thatcamp.org/
  [SHERPA/Romeo site]: http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/
