% Google Docs and Group Work
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% October 13, 2011 

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [Google Docs and
Group Work][].
</div>

Mark Sample recently had a [great post about reading aloud in the
classroom][], in the course of which he also briefly revealed how he
uses Google Docs as a sort of digital whiteboard for collecting
responses from students. I’ve also sometimes used Google Docs in the
classroom for similar purposes. The advantage of doing this, of course,
is that the Google Doc created during class can later be shared with
students online. And because Google Docs can be edited collaboratively
by several users at once, it also makes it possible to reproduce the old
pedagogical technique of having students “go to the board” to write down
responses without ever requiring that they leave their seats.

Here’s a quick example of a lesson that I’ve done twice now, with pretty
good results. In my course on the American Civil War Era ([current][]
and [past][]), I devote several of my classes to discussing the
consequences of emancipation for freedpeople. One of my major goals is
to help students appreciate the range of different circumstances in
which freedpeople found themselves. In one class, I do this by
distributing [a packet of four primary sources][], all of which are
available online, and then break students into groups to discuss the
four sources.

So long as at least four students in the class have a laptop with them,
I can also do this next step: I direct students to [this Google
spreadsheet][], whose settings are usually such that anyone with the
link can edit the sheet. I ask each group to answer a series of
questions about the document–when and where the episode described took
place, the circumstances under which laborers are working, and so on.
Each group edits the document simultaneously, and I have it displayed on
a screen in the classroom so that everyone can see everyone else’s edits
as they happen.

At the end of the exercise, we “rank” how well each case met the
expectations and desires of freedpeople (which have been discussed in
previous classes). And by having the spreadsheet before us, we are then
able to have a discussion about which variables seem to correlate most
strongly to situations that benefited freedpeople’s interests. In this
case, what I want them to see is that the date (during the war, or
after), the state, and the presence of the military helped determine the
nature of the post-emancipation labor contracts that developed.

That’s one way I use Google Docs in the classroom. Please share other
tips if you have them!

  [Google Docs and Group Work]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=185
    "Permanent Link: Google Docs and Group Work"
  [great post about reading aloud in the classroom]: http://www.samplereality.com/2011/09/14/on-reading-aloud-in-the-classroom/
  [current]: http://civilwar.blogs.rice.edu
  [past]: http://hist246.blogs.rice.edu
  [a packet of four primary sources]: http://db.tt/5HUbIwFU
    "Reconstruction Group Documents in my Dropbox"
  [this Google spreadsheet]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AtSeKg8iSxZrdHp1Rk9OYTNEa1lyRHZSTm1mSGt1aHc&authkey=COqF17cH&hl=en_US#gid=0
