% H-Net 2.0?
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% July 17, 2011 

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [H-Net 2.0?][].
</div>

Several years ago now, [Mills Kelly wrote a provocative post][]
suggesting that the future of [H-Net][] was bleak. After noting that the
traffic on many of H-Net’s edited, subject-specific e-mail lists was
declining, Kelly argued that e-mail lists had outlived their usefulness
for scholars online. “If H-Net is going to survive into a second
decade,” he said, “I would urge its leadership to give up on email and
move on. Digital communities in the Web 2.0 world just aren’t created in
email any more.”

As someone who participates in Web 2.0 “communities” like Twitter and
the blogosphere, I see Kelly’s point, which may be even more appropriate
now than it was in 2007. But even then, I wasn’t convinced that Web 2.0
posed an all-or-nothing, “[change or die][]” choice for academics
online: either e-mail, or something else. Today, as a book-review editor
for [H-SHEAR][] and a subscriber to several other H-Net lists, I still
believe e-mail lists and newer digital communities can coexist and
thrive together.

Earlier this month, for example, Adam Costanzo at UC-Davis [posted to
the H-SHEAR list][] proposing a Twitter hashtag for the annual meeting
of the Society for Historians of the Early American Republic
([SHEAR][]), which took place this last weekend in Philadelphia.
Costanzo also offered some useful links to sites that talked about how
to have a productive back-channel at a conference. Around the same time,
two presenters at the SHEAR conference, [Mark Cheathem][] and [Daniel
Kilbride][], sent messages to the list with links to their papers.
Finally, a slew of attendees at the meeting “live-tweeted” the sessions
they attended for those who of us who couldn’t make it, [using the
hashtag Costanzo had proposed][]. Among those posting updates for the
conference were Rachel Herrmann ([@raherrmann][]), Jennie Goloboy
([@JennieGoloboy][]), William Tatum ([@wptiii][]), Kathryn Tomasek
([@KathrynTomasek][]), Costanzo ([@adam\_costanzo][]), and Cheathem
([@markcheathem][]), who also posted notes about sessions on [his
blog][].

As far as I know, this is the first time that a sizable number of
SHEAR-ites were tweeting from an annual meeting. But it is worth noting
that this digital community sprung up around and (at least partly) with
the help of H-SHEAR without having to “move on” from it. H-SHEAR and the
live Twitter stream from Philadelphia were neither mutually exclusive
nor co-dependent; the survival of one did not require that the other
live or die.

At the same time, it’s also worth noting that in this particular case,
the Twitter stream lacked some advantages that H-Net still possesses.
For instance, even though I am on Twitter ([@wcaleb][]), I had not known
to look for Costanzo until he posted to H-SHEAR, which suggests how
H-Net can still serve as one of numerous tools for discovering other
digital communities. More importantly, as vibrant as last weekend’s
discussion on Twitter was, a hashtag search for \#SHEAR2011 will
probably, at some indefinite point in the future, cease to work. Whereas
I can still go back to discussion logs from years ago on H-Net, it is
not immediately clear how to do that on Twitter. (This is [likely to be
a problem for the foreseeable future][] now that Twitter, which is not a
non-profit like H-Net, is becoming more mysterious, proprietary and
closed.) Finally, the excellent live-tweeting that was done from the
conference was likely missed by the large number of active subscribers
to the H-Net list.

Another recent episode on the H-SHEAR list illustrates similar points.
Back in April, Daniel Feller of the University of Tennessee posted a
message to the list about [Internet citations and research standards][]
that prompted a good deal of discussion among subscribers. Very quickly,
however, the discussion also jumped off the list into other online
communities. Blog posts by [John Fee][] and [Mark Cheathem][1] noticed
the debate, and a post on the blog of [the Historical Society][] sparked
a rich conversation of its own in the comments. Feller’s post was also
tweeted on the same day it was sent to the list, which led to a stream
of posts related to the debate on Twitter, a few of which (in no
particular order) I saved:

-   [http://twitter.com/\#!/cliotropic/status/63226728495054848][]
-   [http://twitter.com/\#!/cliotropic/status/63046105671282689][]
-   [http://twitter.com/\#!/jnthnwwlsn/status/63023593952509952][]
-   [http://twitter.com/KevinLevin/status/63251444886806528][]
-   [http://twitter.com/cliotropic/status/63250983853105153][]
-   [http://twitter.com/jmadelman/status/63249219737223168][]
-   [http://twitter.com/jmadelman/status/63277736793354241][]
-   [http://twitter.com/jhrees/status/67618584771309568][]
-   [http://twitter.com/wcaleb/status/63276620798115840][]

Here again, a discussion started on H-SHEAR easily spilled over into
other digital communities and enriched the conversation by drawing in
new commenters who did not participate in the discussion on the list.

Of course, a defender of Kelly’s original position could also find
support in these cases. After all, the discussion surrounding the Feller
post did dwindle quickly on the email list while it continued on blogs
and Twitter. Doesn’t this just show that traffic on the traditional
lists is dying and that H-Net is expendable?

My answer would be no, partly because (as already mentioned)
reconstructing and saving a debate on a Web 2.0 platform like Twitter is
still much more difficult than on a threaded email list. If I had not
saved links to the above tweets as they were appearing, it would be
virtually impossible for me to find them again now.

More importantly, however, I question whether declining traffic is
really a symptom of morbidity anymore. After all, one of the hallmarks
of Web 2.0 is the realization that users seek out content when they want
it and have a variety of ways of getting it. I, for one, already keep up
with most H-Net lists using my RSS reader, as I suspect some others do.
I know the H-Net lists are there when I need them, and I can keep them
in the background of my information stream during times when I don’t. So
sparse posts don’t necessarily call into question the worth of the
medium, anymore than a blog post that gets only one or two comments
means that blogs are dead. (This is not even to mention the larger point
that H-Net does more than simply maintain group email lists; it also has
a well-established platform for [open-access, scholarly book reviews][]
that are published online and pushed to list editors.)

Moreover, the rise of new digital communities doesn’t mean the older
digital communities, often composed of different people, should simply
be cut loose. H-SHEAR has a healthy number of subscribers, only a small
percentage of whom currently tweet or blog (as far as I know; a survey
would be interesting). That means that posting to the list reaches a
number of scholars in the field who could not be reached otherwise. Yet
from my point of view, neither these scholars nor the ones who are
active on Web 2.0 sites need feel threatened or inconvenienced by the
existence of the other communities.

I do think that H-Net can do things to help facilitate exchanges among
these varied communities, like making easier permalinks for posts or
incorporating “share” buttons within the archived discussion log pages
online. Even better would be the incorporation of a DISQUS-style
trackback system into the logs, so that viewers could see when a post or
book review has been tweeted or mentioned on a blog. All of these
changes could be made without diehard email subscribers even noticing
them, while they would significantly aid those who wish to link to and
continue list discussions elsewhere. At the same time, however, I think
it’s important to note that the two episodes I’ve mentioned here
occurred even without such features, which aren’t strictly necessary in
order for H-Net to be plugged into the evolving online ecosystems like
Twitter.

In fact, my own advice to H-Net leaders, looking back on what has
happened since Kelly’s original post in 2007, would be to make small
changes but not to change too much. H-Net has certain strengths that
argue strongly for its continued vitality well into the future. But it
would be a mistake, I think, to decide that H-Net needs to do all the
things that Twitter and blogs do in order to stay relevant, and a still
greater mistake to try to replicate such services with another
hermetically sealed set of tools. H-Net doesn’t need to be Google-Plus
to the Facebook of blogs and Twitter; with some slight tweaking, it can
continue to coexist and play a role in a Web that includes those
services. Indeed, it already does.

  [H-Net 2.0?]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=171
    "Permanent Link: H-Net 2.0?"
  [Mills Kelly wrote a provocative post]: http://edwired.org/2007/09/10/the-end-of-h-net/
  [H-Net]: http://www.h-net.org/
  [change or die]: http://chronicle.com/article/Change-or-Die-Scholarly/46962/
  [H-SHEAR]: http://www.h-net.org/shear
  [posted to the H-SHEAR list]: http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-SHEAR&month=1107&week=b&msg=WIdGkCV%2bYgJeRlYXsR0OEQ&user=&pw=
  [SHEAR]: http://www.shear.org
  [Mark Cheathem]: http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-SHEAR&month=1107&week=b&msg=bSwZGcrRTZFjkInzLfWmRg&user=&pw=
  [Daniel Kilbride]: http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-SHEAR&month=1107&week=b&msg=sdM0WOmck9hSb1jtYM1sgw&user=&pw=
  [using the hashtag Costanzo had proposed]: http://twitter.com/#!/search/%23shear2011
  [@raherrmann]: http://twitter.com/Raherrmann
  [@JennieGoloboy]: http://twitter.com/JennieGoloboy
  [@wptiii]: http://twitter.com/wptiii
  [@KathrynTomasek]: http://twitter.com/KathrynTomasek
  [@adam\_costanzo]: http://twitter.com/adam_costanzo
  [@markcheathem]: http://twitter.com/markcheathem
  [his blog]: http://mcheathem.wordpress.com/
  [@wcaleb]: http://twitter.com/wcaleb
  [likely to be a problem for the foreseeable future]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/the-end-of-twapperkeeper-and-what-to-do-about-it/31582
  [Internet citations and research standards]: http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-SHEAR&month=1104&week=d&msg=1rvV6eW8LvgcW4mtpU%2b%2bsQ&user=&pw=
  [John Fee]: http://www.philipvickersfithian.com/2011/04/historians-and-online-sources.html
  [1]: http://mcheathem.wordpress.com/2011/04/28/should-historians-utilize-online-sources/
  [the Historical Society]: http://histsociety.blogspot.com/2011/05/standards-of-citation-and-internet.html
  [http://twitter.com/\#!/cliotropic/status/63226728495054848]: http://twitter.com/#!/cliotropic/status/63226728495054848
  [http://twitter.com/\#!/cliotropic/status/63046105671282689]: http://twitter.com/#!/cliotropic/status/63046105671282689
  [http://twitter.com/\#!/jnthnwwlsn/status/63023593952509952]: http://twitter.com/#!/jnthnwwlsn/status/63023593952509952
  [http://twitter.com/KevinLevin/status/63251444886806528]: http://twitter.com/KevinLevin/status/63251444886806528
  [http://twitter.com/cliotropic/status/63250983853105153]: http://twitter.com/cliotropic/status/63250983853105153
  [http://twitter.com/jmadelman/status/63249219737223168]: http://twitter.com/jmadelman/status/63249219737223168
  [http://twitter.com/jmadelman/status/63277736793354241]: http://twitter.com/jmadelman/status/63277736793354241
  [http://twitter.com/jhrees/status/67618584771309568]: http://twitter.com/jhrees/status/67618584771309568
  [http://twitter.com/wcaleb/status/63276620798115840]: http://twitter.com/wcaleb/status/63276620798115840
  [open-access, scholarly book reviews]: http://www.h-net.org/reviews
