% How to Discuss a Book for History
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% August 19, 2013

In an earlier post on [How to Read for History][], I offered advice to
undergraduate students who are assigned heavy reading loads for history
classes. My central point in that essay was that reading is best thought
of as a kind of conversation---ideally, a conversation that will
continue after a reader has finished a book.

But, ideally or not, if you take history classes, you more than likely
will find yourself being *required* to converse about the books you have
read. If a professor assigns a book and expects you to participate in a
class discussion about it, what should you do? What will you say?

If you are just beginning your study of history, you may find yourself
wanting to make comments like the ones listed below. These hypothetical
comments are quite commonly heard in undergraduate classes, and they are
fine as far as they go. But this post is designed to help you make your
comments go *farther*. These show, at a minimum, that you engaged with
the book beyond a memorization of what it said; you had the beginnings
of a "conversation" with the author. But each of these good comments,
with a little more thinking and preparation, can become *great*
comments.

### "I didn't like this book. The topic just didn't interest me."

If the subject of the book was boring to you, see if you can figure out
why the *author* found the topic interesting. What are the differences
between you and the author that might explain why he or she spent years
researching this subject?

Is there a section of the book in which the author makes the case for
the topic's significance? If so, focus on that section and try to tease
out why it didn't convince you.

If the topic of the book didn't interest you, you may not be alone.
Often writers take up a subject because they have found that previous
historians or writers never thought to consider it. See if there is a
section in the book that discusses what previous writers have said about
this topic. You may find an earlier camp that shared your lack of
interest in the topic; see if you agree with their reasons, and if so,
think about how you would explain why the topic lacks significance.

On the other hand, be aware that your dislike of the topic might not be
universally shared. Consider more specifically why other writers whom
the book mentions have considered this topic. Look back at the previous
or later reading assignments made by your professor, and see if you can
make a guess about why this topic was included in this class. Does it
connect with other themes or questions that have come up? If so, name
those connecting themes, and if not, point this out by saying
specifically why the topic seems out of place or "not like the others"
in the course.

Finally, think carefully about whether your negative reaction to the
book was due to the content or the author's style of presentation. If
the latter, you may have had reactions like the next two.

### "The book was repetitive. S/he kept making the same point."

What *was* that point? Others might have missed what you found to be
everywhere, so work on summarizing, as concisely as possible, what you
identified as the main, constantly repeated point. Were the repeated
points major ones that deserved emphasis, or did the author frequently
repeat points that you think were minor in comparison to the main
points?

### "The book was way too long."

What could the author have cut out without sacrificing the main point or
argument of the book? This reaction offers you another way to articulate
the main argument of the book by explaining specifically what you
considered superfluous.

### "The author doesn't even talk about Topic X."

Would the inclusion of this topic have changed the main argument of the
book? Explain how. Every book must stop somewhere, but some things can
safely be left to another book while others are crucial. Is the topic
that you wanted addressed one of these? If so, explain why.

### "I found the content shocking. Can you believe people in the past did this?"

Why was this content unfamiliar or shocking to you? Is there a gap
between the way the typical person "remembers" the past and the work
that historians do? Were you taught about this subject in school? If
not, do you have ideas about *why* not? *Should* the subject be taught
or known more generally, and if so, why?

### "They did a lot of research and clearly know their stuff. I can't think of anything to criticize!"

Take a close look at the bibliography or the footnotes. What kind of
research or evidence did the author most rely on? Are there particular
collections of documents or particular kinds of sources (documents,
maps, images, films, novels, etc.) that the author uses most frequently?
Would research in different sorts of collections, produced by different
historical actors, have changed the book in any way?

Alternatively, see if you can find an exemplary passage where the
expertise and skill of the author is on full display. Why did this
passage strike you as such a clear example of the depth of the author's
research? How did s/he use evidence in this passage to persuade you, the
reader, of a point's validity?

### "I loved this book! What more can I say?"

As with the last question, see if you can make a list of the specific
things that you liked. Was it the extent or quality of the evidence? The
author's writing style? How did the choices made by the author improve
the book, and can you imagine a different choice that might have made it
less successful? You can make this good comment great by pointing to
specific passages that exemplify the book's strengths.

On the other hand, be aware that your love for the book may not be
universal. Are there any hints within the text itself that other authors
disagree with this one? If not, seek out a review of the book online or
in the library. Does the book or the review point to larger debates
within the history profession, and if so, can you guess what the major
counter-arguments to your support for the book would be? Prepare for the
discussion by thinking about those counter-arguments so you can better
defend your agreement with the author's position.

Conclusion
----------

In all of these cases, the best way to make a good comment great is to
take each book you read seriously as a labor-intensive,
long-in-the-making expression of the author's considered opinions. Those
opinions therefore deserve your careful consideration, too.

The author you have read probably began the process of writing this book
with comments or reactions not unlike the ones listed above: he or she
found something shocking or intriguing, or disagreed strongly with
something else he or she read. But as the existence of this book shows,
there was much more to be said about the subject than "I wonder why they
did that then?" or "That view is just wrong!"

Thus, even better than using the tips above is to use the book itself as
your guide for how to make thoughtful comments about it. Just as the
author pushed beyond an initial reaction to a topic or debate, you can
deepen your reaction and thereby enrich the discussion in your history
class.

Further Reading
---------------

For more thoughts on how to participate in or facilitate class
discussions about a history book, check out these other guides:

-   [Hints for Class Discussion][], from History and American Studies at
    the University of Mary Washington
-   [Tips on Leading Class Discussions][], by Rachel Seidman
-   [Reading Well to Discuss Well][], by Harry Williams
-   [Facilitating a Discussion][] from the University of Oregon

And if you have ideas or links of your own, you can send them to me on
[Twitter][] and I'll consider them for inclusion here. Have a great
discussion, and happy reading!

  [How to Read for History]: /howtoread.html
  [Hints for Class Discussion]: http://cas.umw.edu/historyamericanstudies/history-department-resources/oral-presentations/hints-for-class-discussion/
  [Tips on Leading Class Discussions]: http://apps.carleton.edu/curricular/history/study/leaddiscussion/
  [Reading Well to Discuss Well]: http://apps.carleton.edu/curricular/history/study/read/discuss/
  [Facilitating a Discussion]: http://tep.uoregon.edu/resources/faqs/presenting/facilitatediscussion.html
  [Twitter]: http://twitter.com/wcaleb
