% In Search of John Brown’s Timbucto, Part I
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% August 11, 2010

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [In Search of John
Brown’s Timbucto, Part I][].
</div>

Recently the *Washington Post* reported on the ongoing excavation of [a
nineteenth-century African American settlement called Timbuctoo][] in
New Jersey. This long-buried community, now evident only in the traces
of found Mason jars, crumbling bricks, and the memories of the
community’s living descendants, was founded in the 1820s “by freed
blacks and escaped slaves” who bought the land from Quaker
abolitionists.

The story of this Timbuctoo was news to me. But it immediately caught my
eye because of my past study of the abolitionist John Brown, whose
famous antislavery raid on Harper’s Ferry, Virginia, had its
sesquicentennial anniversary last year. Brown’s raid is widely known as
one of the events that contributed to the coming of the Civil War. Less
widely known is that ten years before Harper’s Ferry, in 1849, Brown
moved his family to upstate New York to live near a small free black
settlement in [Essex County, near Lake Placid][].

And coincidentally, this settlement in North Elba, New York, which is
[also apparently under excavation][], was also sometimes referred to as
Timbucto.

When reading the *Post* article I was first struck with the obvious
question: how coincidental was the fact that these two free black
communities in New Jersey and New York shared their unusual name? Is it
possible that Brown knew of Timbuctoo, New Jersey, when he moved to New
York in 1849? Or did abolitionists between the 1820s and the 1850s
simply refer often enough to [Timbuktu][]–the difficult-to-reach city
located in the West African interior–to make that name a familiar and
meaningful one to both Brown and the New Jersey settlers?

Those questions raise another big question: why the name Timbuctoo? As
[the *Post* article][a nineteenth-century African American settlement
called Timbuctoo] notes, the New Jersey settlement “was probably named
after Timbuktu, the town in Mali near the Niger River, although
researchers are still trying to find out how and why it got its name.” I
can sympathize with these researchers’ difficulty, because while doing
research for a scholarly article on John Brown, I briefly spent time
trying to figure out “how and why” Brown’s “Timbucto” got its name.
Answering those questions was not as easy as I thought it would be. In
this post, I’ll talk about the question of *how* Brown’s Timbucto got
its name, and in Part II, I’ll consider the question of *why* it bore
that name.

Three years before John Brown moved his family to upstate New York, the
wealthy white abolitionist Gerrit Smith divided 120,000 acres of his
land there into small parcels and donated small deeds to free black New
Yorkers. Much of the land was deep in the Adirondack Mountains and
difficult to locate, much less to farm. Dishonest surveyors led some of
the deed-holders to land that wasn’t theirs, while some settlers
mistakenly squatted on land belonging to someone else.

In fact, upon his arrival in Essex County in 1849, one of the first
things John Brown did, having worked as a surveyor before, was to write
to Smith on behalf of three black settlers–James H. Henderson, and two
brothers, Thomas and Samuel Jefferson–who had settled and built
improvements on Lot 93 in Township 12. Henderson and the Jeffersons
probably settled on Lot 93 because the lands they had been deeded by
Smith were in a virtually inaccessible wilderness. But Lot 93 actually
belonged to a man named Pliny Nash, who had a lease-to-buy contract with
Smith. Nash allowed Henderson and the Jeffersons to live on the land,
and Henderson significantly improved his acres, clearing land and
building a house. But he and the Jeffersons were concerned about their
claims. Apparently before Brown arrived, one Jefferson paid money to
Nash, and on June 20, Brown wrote to Smith that he would help “some of
our colored friends” buy out Nash’s claim. He forwarded a draft for $225
to transfer the deed to Henderson, Samuel Jefferson, himself, and his
son Jason Brown, who would divide the lot “among themselves.”

Despite the difficulties facing settlers like Henderson, black
abolitionists in New York (including Frederick Douglass, who at the time
edited a newspaper in Rochester, and Willis A. Hodges, the co-editor of
another black newspaper in New York City) praised the Smith donation.
Between 1847 and 1849, New York’s African American press buzzed with
advice to settlers and lists of emigrants. Many, including Hodges,
believed settlers on the “Smith lands” could escape the immorality and
danger of the city and become self-sufficient. Hodges moved to a
Franklin County settlement in 1848; others, like Henderson and the
Jeffersons, moved near the Essex County villages of North Elba and West
Keene.

John Brown appears to have first called the Essex County settlement
“Timbucto” in 1848, when he began corresponding with Hodges about the
Smith lands. Six letters from Brown to Hodges, all written in 1848 and
1849 before Brown’s family arrived in Essex, were later published in the
New York *Evening-Post* shortly after Brown’s execution. ([Download a
PDF image of these letters][], taken from the *Evening-Post*.) Three of
them refer to a settlement in Essex County as “Timbucto.”

Because of those references, [many writers now use the name
“Timbucto”][] to refer to the entire African American settlement around
North Elba, where at least some members of Brown’s family remained more
than a decade later and where Brown’s body was buried after his
execution. In the earliest drafts of my article on Brown, I also used
“Timbucto” and “North Elba” interchangeably, following this common
usage.

But along the way, several discoveries made me reconsider that naming
decision, and I started wondering how “Timbucto” got its name in the
first place. First, the name “Timbucto” was used disproportionately by
Brown himself and by members of his family. The *Evening Post* article
that published the letters to Hodges even claimed explicitly that Brown
himself named the settlement, though it did not reveal the source of
this information beyond the letters themselves. There is very limited
evidence that black settlers also used or played a role in choosing the
name. One letter by James H. Henderson, which was published in the
*North Star*, Frederick Douglass’s newspaper, on February 16, 1849, was
addressed from “West Keene Timbucto, Essex Co.” But this is the only hit
returned from a search for “Timbucto” in [a digitized edition of the
*North Star* made by Accessible Archives][]. And since Henderson
reported in the letter, dated January 29, that Brown had recently
visited Essex and met Henderson, it is still possible that Brown, who
had used the name “Timbucto” in an earlier 1848 letter to Hodges, was
the one who dubbed the settlement. Aside from references to “Timbucto”
in the correspondence of Brown and his family, of which there were
several more, Henderson’s is the only clear example I know of in which
an African American settler used the name.

Second, even among the Browns, references to “Timbucto” appear to have
been confined to the first year or two after they moved to Essex County.
The late Edwin Cotter, the long-time curator of the Brown farmstead and
[state historic site][] at North Elba, noticed this while conducting his
researches on the area. [Cotter’s papers][] (PDF) are now available to
researchers at [the library of SUNY-Plattsburgh][], and when I visited
this archive, I found a typed note by Cotter in which he compiled a list
of what he believed to be the only references to “Timbucto or
Timbuctoo.” These included the three letters to Hodges, Henderson’s
letter in the *North Star*, and a letter from Brown’s oldest son John
Brown Jr. to his mother Mary Brown in October 1849. I know of at least
one other reference to “Timbucto” in the Brown family correspondence,
but it–like the others–occurred before 1850. This supports Cotter’s
hypothesis that after 1849 or 1850 “the name is never used again.”

Because of the limited usage of the name “Timbucto” in contemporary
sources, Cotter also wondered whether “Timbucto” might have been meant
to refer not to the whole Essex County settlement of which Brown was a
part, but instead to one small part of it. “If the whole town was called
Timbuctoo,” asked Cotter in his notes, “why was the name only used up to
the fall of 1849?” His notes continue:

> Why did the Browns not use it later to describe the town or the whole
> area? There were blacks here later but nobody we know of ever used the
> word Timbuctoo. Why? The only answer must be is that there was a small
> place or area the Browns and the blacks called Timbucto. The blacks in
> the place called Timbuctoo must have left here early, maybe as early
> as late 1849 or 1850 because the name is never used again.

The evidence I’ve seen supports this hypothesis, too, because on the
occasions when the Brown family referred to Timbucto, they implied that
it was a separate place from the location where they initially resided–a
rented farm in West Keene. Most of the letters that the Browns wrote
from or to their new home in 1849 and 1850 were addressed “Essex” or
“Keene,” and never “Timbucto,” unlike Henderson’s letter in the *North
Star*.

Not until March 1850 does “North Elba” even appear in the datelines of
the Browns’ letters that I have examined, which may be because North
Elba was officially considered part of Keene until 1850. But what seems
clear is that when the Browns referred to “Timbucto,” they were not
referring to where they themselves lived–the rented farm in West Keene.
Instead, when John Brown Jr. visited his siblings at the farmstead in
the fall of 1849, while both his parents were absent, he wrote to Mary
Brown that after reaching “Keene” and visiting the family he had also
visited “Timbuctoo,” suggesting it was a separate place. An earlier
letter from Ruth, Brown’s daughter, to her absent mother also reported
that “the folks are all very well to [or tow?] Timbucto, I believe,”
before mentioning several African American settlers specifically. This
suggests that there were several families living between the place Ruth
called Timbucto and the Browns’ own farm.

If “Timbucto” was not a name used by the Browns for the entire
settlement of Smith grantees or the area that included their rented
farm, then where was “Timbucto”? One plausible answer is that “Timbucto”
referred narrowly to the farms of Henderson and the Jefferson brothers
clustered together on Lot 93. The Cotter collection at SUNY-Plattsburgh
also includes some typed notes from 1994 by [local historian Mary
MacKenzie][], who gives some compelling reasons for this theory. And
though she doesn’t mention it in her notes, the idea that “Timbucto” was
a name for the Henderson-Jefferson conclave would help explain why
Henderson addressed his letter to the *North Star* from “Timbucto” while
no other black settler that I know of used the name.

If “Timbucto” never did refer to the entire settlement of African
Americans in Essex County, as Cotter and MacKenzie both suspected, then
that raises the question of how the name lived on. As MacKenzie points
out in her notes at SUNY-Plattsburgh, the name got a new lease on life
from [the chapter on Brown and North Elba in Alfred L. Donaldson’s
two-volume *History of the Adirondacks*][], published in 1921. According
to MacKenzie, Donaldson relied on the memories of white “old-timers”
still living in the area, and [his resulting depiction of the black
settlement][] as a laughable shantytown amounted to a flagrantly racist
caricature. Donaldson mocked Gerrit Smith’s plan to found a “negro
colony in the mountains” as a “pure chimera,” suggesting that the
likelihood of “an escaped slave” creating a “so-called Adirondack farm”
was about the same as the likelihood that “an Italian lizard” would
survive on a “Norwegian iceberg.” And he didn’t stop there:

> The farms allotted to the negroes consisted of forty acres each, but
> the natural gregariousness of the race tended to defeat the purpose of
> these individual holdings. The darkies began to build their shanties
> in one place, instead of on their separate grants. Before long about
> ten families had huddled their houses together down by the brook, not
> far from where the White Church now stands. The shanties were square,
> crudely built of logs, with flat roofs, out of which little
> stove-pipes protruded at varying angles. The last touch of pure
> negroism was a large but dilapidated red flag that floated above the
> settlement, bearing the half-humorous, half-pathetic legend
> ‘Timbuctoo’–a name that was applied to the whole vicinity for several
> years.

The reliability of Donaldson’s reportage here is undercut by his clear
contempt for “the darkies.” He provides no source for his claim that the
name Timbuctoo “was applied to the whole vicinity for several years,”
and the passive construction of that sentence is a telling indication of
the mystery surrounding who actually began calling it that. Donaldson
also added the odd detail of a red flag reading “Timbuctoo” raised above
the settlement. That detail has been picked up by [some later writers][]
and makes [an appearance in Russell Banks’s fictionalized historical
novel][] about John Brown. But until Donaldson mentioned it, the flag
does not appear in any earlier source that I know of.

MacKenzie apparently believed that Donaldson simply invented the flag in
order to underline the bathos and “negroism” of the whole experiment. It
is possible, though, that there was at some point a flag remembered by
local residents with whom Donaldson spoke. If there was a flag, however,
it doesn’t shed much light on how the name came to be attached to the
area. Was it a “half-humorous, half-pathetic” name jokingly used by
hostile white neighbors, and then repurposed by defiant black settlers
who made the name their own? Or was it used by Brown and/or Henderson to
refer to the Lot 93 farms, only to then be picked up in the neighborhood
and immortalized by a flag put up to mark the spot by unknown
parties–perhaps even long after the settlers had left? The Donaldson
account does not permit us to say, so that the questions of how
“Timbucto” got its name–or who named it–remain somewhat mysterious.

One thing the Donaldson paragraph may unintentionally do, however, is
strengthen MacKenzie’s idea that “Timbucto” referred to the small
cluster of Henderson and Jefferson farms on Pliny Nash’s land. That may
be why Donaldson’s sources gave him information suggesting that some
black settlers “began to build their shanties in one place, instead of
on their separate grants.” “After all,” as MacKenzie puts it in her
notes at SUNY-Plattsburgh, at one point there was “a total of 16 black
people living on the land—8 Hendersons and 8 Jeffersons. All three
houses were possibly close to Pine Brook, a handy source of water,”
which may explain Donaldson’s location of “Timbuctoo” near a brook.

Of course, the circumstantial evidence that “Timbucto” was actually a
name for the cluster of Henderson-Jefferson households does not help
answer the question of “how” that name was assigned. But it might help
solve the riddle Cotter identified–which is the question of why the name
“Timbucto” disappears from the primary sources almost as soon as it
appears. If the name was not used by Brown or other settlers after
around 1850, as I suspect, then it may be because both Henderson and the
Jeffersons did not stay in the area very long.

Remember that shortly after arriving in North Elba, Brown wrote to Smith
attempting to purchase the deed for the Timbucto farms on Lot 93 for
$225 so as to divide it between himself, his son, Henderson, and the
Jeffersons. But not long after that, Brown wrote to Smith again asking
him instead to credit the $225 to his own purchase of Lot 95. Henderson
apparently continued paying Nash for his claim on Lot 93, but both
Jefferson brothers soon left the area for several years, not returning
until 1854.

Henderson remained but, on October 15, 1850, he wrote a frustrated
letter to Smith. Smith’s agent had told Henderson that he could not
purchase acreage in Lot 93, though Brown had apparently suggested
otherwise. Now, evidently having heard rumors that the Jeffersons were
trying to sell their lots and fearing his would be sold from under him,
Henderson appealed to Smith: “i wood [sic] not like to loos [sic] my
house and improvements.”

Tragically, however, Henderson had not secured his title before he froze
to death in the woods in 1852. Shortly thereafter, Henderson’s wife left
“Timbucto” and placed his children in the Colored Orphan Aslyum in New
York City. Other African American settlers remained on the Smith lands
around North Elba, but with both the Hendersons and the Jeffersons now
gone from Lot 93, perhaps “Timbucto” was no more.

[Proceed to [Part II][] of this series.]

**Sources**

You can read more about the “Smith lands” in any biography of John Brown
and in recent books like John Stauffer’s *The Black Hearts of Men:
Radical Abolitionists and the Transformation of Race* (2009) and Leslie
M. Harris’s *In the Shadow of Slavery: African Americans in New York
City, 1626-1863* (2003). Also see Willard B. Gatewood, Jr., ed., *Free
Man of Color: The Autobiography of Willis Augustus Hodges* (1982). **§**
For Edwin Cotter’s notes about the name Timbucto, see “Timbucto or
Timbuctoo,” in Box 28, Folder 307, of the Cotter Collection at
[SUNY-Plattsburgh][the library of SUNY-Plattsburgh]. **§** The
information in this post about James H. Henderson, the Jefferson
brothers, and Lot 93 relies on James H. Henderson’s letter (January 29,
1849) to Henry Highland Garnet, published in “Communications,” *North
Star* (Rochester), February 16, 1849; and the following items in the
Cotter Collection at [SUNY-Plattsburgh][the library of
SUNY-Plattsburgh]: James H. Henderson to Gerrit Smith, 15 October 1850
(typed copy made by Mary MacKenzie), Box 20, Folder 239; John Brown to
Gerrit Smith, 20 June 1849 (typed copy), Box 12, Folder 143; John Brown
to Gerrit Smith, 8 November 1849 (typed copy), Box 12, Folder 140;
“Samuel Jefferson-Thomas Jefferson,” and “James H. Henderson” (typed
notes compiled by Mary MacKenzie and dated 1994), Box 11, Folder 136. On
the placement of Henderson’s children in a New York orphanage after his
death, see Harris, *In the Shadow of Slavery*, p. 278. **§** For the two
cited references to Timbucto in letters by Brown’s children, see John
Brown Jr. to Mary Brown, 13 October 1849, John Brown Jr. Papers, [Ohio
Historical Society][], MSS 47; Ruth Brown to Mother, 7 September 1849,
John Brown Papers, [Kansas Historical Society][], Folder 1.12 (viewed on
microfilm). **§** Since Mary MacKenzie’s death in 2003, [her many
writings on Adirondack history][local historian Mary MacKenzie] have
been compiled and published, many of them in [this online book][], *The
Plains of Abraham*. The book reproduces some of her notes on Henderson
and North Elba from the Cotter collection (see pages 135-138) and also
includes a chapter laying out MacKenzie’s argument that the “Timbuctoo”
name was an invention of Donaldson’s (see pages 158-159). MacKenzie
incorrectly states that Timbuctoo was never used by any African American
settler or by anyone other than John Brown himself, but the gist of her
argument here deserves notice.

  [In Search of John Brown’s Timbucto, Part I]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=14
    "Permanent Link: In Search of John Brown’s Timbucto, Part I"
  [a nineteenth-century African American settlement called Timbuctoo]: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/08/02/AR2010080205217.html
  [Essex County, near Lake Placid]: http://maps.google.com/maps?q=essex%20county%20new%20york
  [also apparently under excavation]: http://pressrepublican.com/0100_news/x1896362004/Sifting-for-evidence-of-life-at-Timbucto
  [Timbuktu]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timbuktu
  [Download a PDF image of these letters]: http://www.owlnet.rice.edu/~wcm1/pdf/john-brown-to-hodges-letters-1848-1849.pdf
  [many writers now use the name “Timbucto”]: http://www.google.com/search?q=%22john%20brown%22%20timbucto#hl=en&q=%22john%20brown%22%20timbucto&nfpr=1&um=1&ie=UTF-8&tbo=u&tbs=bks:1&source=og&sa=N&tab=wp&fp=1&cad=b
  [a digitized edition of the *North Star* made by Accessible Archives]:
    http://www.accessible.com/accessible/about/aboutAA.jsp
  [state historic site]: http://nysparks.state.ny.us/historic-sites/29/details.aspx
  [Cotter’s papers]: http://web.plattsburgh.edu/files/3/files/Cotter.pdf
  [the library of SUNY-Plattsburgh]: http://www.plattsburgh.edu/library/specialcollections/manuscriptguides.php
  [local historian Mary MacKenzie]: http://www.wagner.edu/media/node/262
  [the chapter on Brown and North Elba in Alfred L. Donaldson’s
  two-volume *History of the Adirondacks*]: http://books.google.com/books?id=ohCrJZGEgYwC&pg=PA3#v=onepage&q&f=false
  [his resulting depiction of the black settlement]: http://books.google.com/books?id=ohCrJZGEgYwC&pg=PA6#v=onepage&q&f=false
  [some later writers]: http://www.google.com/search?tbs=bks%3A1&tbo=1&q=%28timbucto+or+timbuctoo%29+%22red+flag%22+%22north+elba%22&btnG=Search+Books#hl=en&tbo=1&tbs=bks%3A1&q=%28timbucto+OR+timbuctoo%29+%22red+flag%22+%22north+elba%22&aq=f&aqi=m1&aql=&oq=&gs_rfai=&pbx=1&fp=11e4dbcf7bece324
  [an appearance in Russell Banks’s fictionalized historical novel]: http://books.google.com/books?id=gri4AX2RVSEC&&pg=PA175#v=onepage&q&f=false
  [Part II]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=46
  [Ohio Historical Society]: http://www.ohiohistory.org/resource/archlib/index.html#collections
  [Kansas Historical Society]: http://www.kshs.org/research/collections/documents/personalpapers/findingaids/brown_john.htm
  [this online book]: http://www.slideshare.net/LeeManchester/the-plains-of-abraham-a-history-of-north-elba-and-lake-placid
