% Methods in U.S. Cultural History
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% January 13, 2012 

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [Methods in U.S.
Cultural History][].
</div>

Today I started teaching my semester-long graduate seminar, HIST 587:
Methods in U.S. Cultural History. The [syllabus][] I will be using is
very similar to the one I used in the [Fall 2009][] semester, in that
the major objective will be to produce a draft of an article-length
essay based on original research. But I am also going to be trying at
least two new things this time around.

First, I am planning to share extensive early drafts and notes from my
first graduate school research paper, which ultimately became (after
*much* revision) my [first published article][]. My plan is to let
students in the course see the often messy and gradual process by which
an article is made, a process that can unfortunately be obscured by the
more finished products that graduate students are used to reading.

My reason for picking my own article to pick apart in class is *not*
because I think the process that produced it was exemplary. On the
contrary, while dusting off my old files for this article I’ve already
found embarrassing mistakes, inefficiencies, and clunky methods that I
would not use again. With the availability of digitized versions of many
of the sources I used then, I’m not sure my research strategy would even
be exactly the same today. And I’m also planning to share the readers’
reports I received recommending rejection of an earlier draft of this
article, submitted to a different journal.

I have to say I’m making these decision with some hesitance; in an
advice essay that I respect a lot, [Phil Agre][] explicitly urges
advisors to resist the temptation to talk about themselves. But my
thinking is this: as even Agre acknowledges, when people offer advice
about methods, how to do research, how to get something published,
usually they *are* referring implicitly to their own experiences and
particular choices, even when they don’t say so explicitly or realize it
consciously. I’m hoping that sharing my own experience will make overt
and transparent the particular stories and choices I would be drawing on
anyway in teaching a methods class.

That transparency will hopefully communicate that my own decisions and
methods are only some of the many possible ones; to reinforce that
point, I’ve invited the authors of two other articles we will be reading
to Skype into our seminar and talk about their methods and work. I’m
also hoping by my own willingness to talk about my methods to encourage
students in the course to share what they do.

The other new thing I’m going to try to do more consciously in this
course is to introduce discussions of how digital tools for research and
communication are (or are not) changing methods in U.S. cultural history
and beyond. This is a subject that has been much debated of late: some
believe that digital humanities [is][] or [should be][] changing
everything about our methods; [others][] are deeply [skeptical][]. Most
of what I read on the subject falls [somewhere in between][], as do I.

Still, as I’ve noted before on this blog, I do think it’s safe to say
that there are [many changes afoot][] in the way that new historians
will [do research][], [present their findings][], and communicate with
each other through conferences like [SHEAR][] and the [AHA][]. When I
started the article that I’m planning to share in class in the fall of
2001, my research process consisted of sitting in front of a microfilm
machine listening to music on a 15GB [Archos Jukebox][]. Since then my
research still involves microfilm, of course, but new methods have also
become part of my daily workflow. In this course I’m hoping to stimulate
some discussion about these changes, partly with one of the week’s
readings but also throughout the course.

Perhaps it is misguided to introduce digital history in a methods course
that is still fairly traditional (maybe even Jurassic, if you agree with
[Bethany Nowviskie][is]). But I’m disinclined to see decisions about
what goes in a methods course as a [zero-sum game][]. The environment in
which historians do their work is certainly changing, but I think this
calls less for an asteroid-like obliteration of the old than for
selective adaptation and openness to new methodological mutations. Even
in the brave new world current graduate students are entering, I think
it’s safe to say there will still be many scholars writing journal
articles. At least, I hope there will be. It’s not the best or only
form, but it has its virtues, and I think it’s worth preserving
alongside whatever other new species of scholarship are currently being
born.

  [Methods in U.S. Cultural History]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=195
    "Permanent Link: Methods in U.S. Cultural History"
  [syllabus]: http://caleb.mcdaniel.web.rice.edu/pdf/hist587syllabus.pdf
  [Fall 2009]: http://caleb.mcdaniel.web.rice.edu/pdf/hist587.pdf
  [first published article]: http://scholarship.rice.edu/handle/1911/27613
  [Phil Agre]: http://vlsicad.ucsd.edu/Research/Advice/network.html#section10
  [is]: http://nowviskie.org/2011/it-starts-on-day-one/
  [should be]: http://chronicle.com/article/Historians-Reflect-on-Forces/130262/
  [others]: http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/the-digital-humanities-and-the-transcending-of-mortality/
  [skeptical]: http://us-intellectual-history.blogspot.com/2012/01/utopianism-of-digital-humanities.html
  [somewhere in between]: http://miriamposner.com/blog/?p=1101
  [many changes afoot]: http://activehistory.ca/2012/01/too-much-information-the-case-for-the-programming-historian/
  [do research]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=150
  [present their findings]: http://www.shermansmarch.org/
  [SHEAR]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=171
  [AHA]: http://emn.sharonhoward.org/2012/01/twitter-aha-2012/
  [Archos Jukebox]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archos_Jukebox_series
  [zero-sum game]: https://twitter.com/#!/dancohen/status/156921729602691072
