% New light on a Lincoln quote
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% April 2, 2011

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [New light on a
Lincoln quote][].
</div>

In an age of word clouds, topic modeling, text mining, and infinite
archives, it’s not surprising that many discussions about digital
history focus on the “big” uses of things like keyword searching and
digitized texts. For historians, access to huge archives of online text
raises important questions about [how to read—and how not to read—a
million books][]. Big archives also create exciting opportunities for
visualization and text analysis like [Building the Digital Lincoln][],
Rob Nelson’s [Mining the Dispatch][], and Cameron Blevins’ [work on
Martha Ballard’s diary][].

But with all these exciting new ventures, it’s sometimes easy to lose
sight of the fact that simple keyword searches can still offer
historians new insights into old sources. One of my most exciting “Aha!”
moments (the moments researchers live for) came not along ago when I
decided to enter a simple text string from one of Abraham Lincoln’s most
famous speeches into the search box on ProQuest’s database of historical
*New York Times* newspapers. I did one search, and got exactly one
result. But that was enough to enable me to shed some new light on an
old Lincoln quote.

\
 [The speech that Lincoln gave in Peoria, Illinois][], on October 16,
1854, is significant for many reasons. It marks Lincoln’s return to
politics at a time when he was still a little-known free-soil politician
whose only experience in national politics had been a short stint in the
House of Representatives. The speech detailed Lincoln’s opposition to
the Kansas-Nebraska Act and synthesized the arguments that were
galvanizing the new Republican Party that would ultimately vault Lincoln
into the White House. And it contains some of Lincoln’s most stirring
prose about the damage that slavery was doing to the country that he
loved.

At Peoria, for example, Lincoln declared that he hated the “zeal” for
slavery’s expansion manifested by the Kansas-Nebraska Act. “I hate it
because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself,” Lincoln said, and
“I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just
influence in the world—enables the enemies of free institutions, with
plausibility, to taunt us as hypocrites—causes the real friends of
freedom to doubt our sincerity.” In another of the speech’s most
memorable lines, Lincoln warned Americans that “our republican robe is
soiled, and trailed in the dust.”

Later, in a crucial and also famous paragraph, Lincoln pressed this
claim that slavery was injuring the influence of American republicanism
abroad. “Already the liberal party throughout the world, express the
apprehension ‘that the one retrograde institution in America, is
undermining the principles of progress, and fatally violating the
noblest political system the world ever saw.’” This was not the taunt of
enemies, Lincoln explained, “but the warning of friends.” He therefore
urged Americans to “readopt the Declaration of Independence,” not only
to save the Union, but to save it in such a way “that the succeeding
millions of free happy people, the world over, shall rise up, and call
us blessed, to the latest generations.”

Famous words, these. If you were reading that last paragraph closely,
however, you would have noticed that some of the words Lincoln spoke at
Peoria were not his own. There are quotation marks in the text of the
speech which indicate that one phrase was a quotation from another
source. The quoted text reads:

> that the one retrograde institution in America, is undermining the
> principles of progress, and fatally violating the noblest political
> system the world ever saw

I had long wondered where the quotation came from, but the existing
secondary literature on Lincoln sheds no light on the question. The
*Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln*, which are [online][], retain the
internal quotation marks around that phrase, but there is no annotation
indicating its source.

So one day last summer, it occurred to me to do a quick search in
ProQuest’s database of historical newspapers to see if I could figure
out where the quote came from. The result? After a couple of tries, I
hit gold with a search for the quote “one retrograde institution” in all
newspapers from 1854. I discovered that Lincoln was paraphrasing from an
article that appeared in the *New York Times* on September 29, 1854. And
as an added bonus, I also discovered that another famous phrase in
Lincoln’s speech—his reference to a “liberal party throughout the
world”—was also a paraphrased quotation.

The article that contains these quotes was actually a reprint from the
September 12 edition of the London *Daily News*, which the *Times*
published under the headline, “Mr. Soule’s ‘Vulgar Turbulence’–George
Sanders.” It was a long editorial complaining about the recent behavior
of two American ambassadors in Europe, who had recently made waves with
several brazen attempts to pressure Spain into selling slaveholding Cuba
to the United States. First, in 1854, [Pierre Soulé][] had helped author
the provocative [Ostend Manifesto][], and he was accused of trying to
wrangle Cuba away from Spain by exploiting the distractions Madrid then
faced from threats of internal revolution by liberal reformers.
Meanwhile, [George N. Sanders][], in addition to revealing some
anti-republican sentiments in comments he made on the political
condition of Switzerland, had recently denounced an antislavery letter
published by the Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Mazzini. He had also
attempted to persuade Lajos Kossuth, the famous Hungarian revolutionary
living in exile in England, to issue a statement dissociating European
revolutionaries from the antislavery cause in America.

The appearance of proslavery diplomats like these “in any of the
capitals of Europe,” opined the *Daily News*, “is a symptom of peril
which all true Americans should take heed to without the loss of a
moment.” It was a powerful point, and to drive it home, the London paper
closed with the flourish that evidently caught Lincoln’s attention,
whether he read it in the *New York Times* or in another source:

> It will take many years of a virtuous foreign policy, and a long
> succession of honorable envoys, to remove the apprehensions of the
> Liberal party throughout Europe that the one retrograde institution in
> America is undermining the principle of progress, and fatally
> vitiating the noblest political system that the world ever saw.

So there you have it. When Lincoln cited the opinion of the “liberal
party throughout the world” at Peoria in 1854, he was echoing the
“apprehensions” of the *Daily News* and the “Liberal party throughout
Europe.”

Knowing this illuminates several other things about the Peoria speech.
First, it explains why Lincoln added that the opinion he quoted was not
the taunt of enemies to the United States, “but the warning of friends.”
As a supporter of the principle of “popular government,” said the *Daily
News*, “we have ever been among the heartiest well-wishers of the
Americans” and had “never suffered from those apprehensions of the
Republic being destroyed once a year or so, which we have been
accustomed to hear of all our lives.” Previous sectional divisions over
slavery had never yet shaken these liberal Englishmen’s faith that “our
self-governing cousins” would progress to full freedom. But for the
first time, the *Daily News* now feared for the republic’s future. And
an ocean away in Illinois, Abraham Lincoln apparently took that newfound
fear as an ominous indication of what the zeal for slavery in the United
States was doing to the reputation of the world’s model republic and the
hopes of liberal reformers abroad.

Second, Lincoln’s citation of the *Daily News* article provides a fuller
context for understanding why he and other Republicans rallied to new
action in the summer and fall of 1854. Most explanations of that shift
have focused on outrage about the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which was what
Lincoln focused on most explicitly in his Peoria speech. But his
attention to the article on Sanders and Soulé reveals that Lincoln was
also personally angered by the expansionist, proslavery foreign policy
of Franklin Pierce’s administration and by the Cuba annexation movement
underway at the same time. Indeed, at Peoria, Lincoln explained that one
of the most outrageous things about the Kansas-Nebraska Act was that its
“prospective principle,” which allowed territorial settlers to decide
about the legality of slavery for themselves, would allow slavery “to
spread to every other part of the wide world, where men can be found
inclined to take it.” Though he didn’t say which parts of the wide world
he had in mind, the *Daily News* article is good evidence that Cuba must
have been on his mind as he spoke at Peoria.

Concern about the fortunes of the “liberal party” abroad was not the
exception for Lincoln, but the rule. And what this quotation reveals,
finally, is that Lincoln understood himself not just as an American, but
as a member of a broader “liberal party throughout the world.” In fact,
only three years before Lincoln read about Sanders’s efforts to pressure
Kossuth to disavow abolitionism, Lincoln had actually served on [a
welcoming committee in Illinois organized to greet Kossuth][] on his
famous 1851 tour of the United States. That fact is suggestive evidence
of Lincoln’s long-standing interest in the fortunes of European
revolutionaries and reformers.

Also suggestive is one of the items found among [the things Lincoln was
carrying on the night that he was assassinated][] (incidentally, a crime
in which the same George N. Sanders was implicated). As Lincoln sat in
Ford’s Theater watching a popular English play, there were nine
newspaper clippings carefully folded in his leather wallet. And one of
them was the report of [a speech by the English liberal John Bright][],
a parliamentary reformer and ardent supporter of the Union cause.

In the speech, Bright spoke of his support for the reelection of Lincoln
in 1864 (which indicates Lincoln had been carrying it for some time).
Bright’s support must have been gratifying to Lincoln, but perhaps what
was most important to the President was Bright’s concluding paragraph:

> I believe that the effect of Mr. Lincoln’s reelection in England, and
> in Europe, and indeed throughout the world, will be this: it will
> convince all men that the integrity of your great country will be
> preserved, and it will show that Republican institutions, *with an
> instructed and patriotic people*, can bear a nation safely and
> steadily through the most desperate perils.

Bright’s speech was, on the whole, more optimistic about the fortunes of
republicanism abroad than the *Daily News* a decade earlier. But what
both of these clippings had in common—and what evidently made an
impression on Lincoln—was their assertion that what happened in the
United States had a bearing on the destiny of “Republican institutions”
in England as well as “throughout the world.” Knowing that Lincoln read
clippings like these, we can conclude that his own powerful rhetoric was
informed partly by his attention to what the “liberal party” was saying
abroad.

When he expressed his fear that “our republican robe is soiled,” for
example, or his hope “the succeeding millions of free happy people, the
world over, shall rise up, and call us blessed,” Lincoln gave voice not
only to what most Americans liked to believe about the influence of
their country, but also to what actual Europeans were saying at the
time. And given this fact, it can be misleading to remember the wartime
Lincoln as a president who only cared about “the Union” and not at all
about “slavery,” as though Lincoln’s Unionism was a sign of
pusillanimity instead of moral principle. He cared about the Union
partly because he believed the “liberal party throughout the world” was
depending on its demonstration that republican institutions were stable
and just. And as his Peoria speech reveals, that belief was not
separable from his concern about the “monstrous injustice” of slavery.

All of these reflections, remember, were made possible by a simple
keyword search. My discovery of the source of Lincoln’s Peoria quote was
an incredibly easy discovery to make, thanks to the digitization of the
newspaper that contained it. But without that digitization, the article
Lincoln cited—buried as it was in one issue of the *New York
TImes*—would have been incredibly difficult to discover. That may be
why, as far as I am aware, no other historian has ever identified the
quotation’s source, though I would be happy to learn otherwise. Even if
it has been noticed before, the important point is that keyword
searching was responsible for *my* finding it for my research, which is
one of the reasons why historians should be excited by the digitization
of primary sources.

We should be excited, but we should also take an active interest in how
that digitization is done. Six years ago, this is the sort of discovery
that I dreamed that [the keyword revolution][] would make possible. And
I suspect that for most historians, the advantages of the method I’ve
used for this post are more familiar and more obvious than the
advantages of computer-generated search techniques like algorithmic text
mining. But it is worth noting that whether you are text mining, or you
are punching in a simple string of text into a search box to discover
its source, the size of the corpus you are searching matters a great
deal, as does the way that corpus is digitized and made accessible to
historians. Experiences like this one remind me of how important it is
for historians—even those who don’t define themselves as “digital
historians”—to pay attention to issues like [the problems with Optical
Character Recognition][], or Shane Landrum’s [caveat lector][] to users
of ProQuest, or Ben Schmidt’s post on [what historians don’t know about
database design][]. You may not care a lick about Wordle or know a thing
about topic modeling. But if you think it’s useful and interesting to
learn who Abraham Lincoln was quoting in one of his most important
speeches, these are issues that should matter to you. Increasingly, they
matter to me.

  [New light on a Lincoln quote]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=126
    "Permanent Link: New light on a Lincoln quote"
  [how to read—and how not to read—a million books]: http://www3.isrl.illinois.edu/~unsworth/hownot2read.html
  [Building the Digital Lincoln]: http://www.journalofamericanhistory.org/projects/lincoln/media/pinsker/
  [Mining the Dispatch]: http://americanpast.richmond.edu/dispatch/
  [work on Martha Ballard’s diary]: http://historying.org/2009/08/31/text-analysis-of-martha-ballards-diary-part-1/
  [The speech that Lincoln gave in Peoria, Illinois]: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=lincoln;cc=lincoln;q1=republican%20robe;rgn=div1;view=text;idno=lincoln2;node=lincoln2:282;hi=0
  [online]: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/l/lincoln/
  [Pierre Soulé]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_Soulé
  [Ostend Manifesto]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ostend_Manifesto
  [George N. Sanders]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Nicholas_Sanders
  [a welcoming committee in Illinois organized to greet Kossuth]: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=lincoln;cc=lincoln;q1=kossuth;rgn=div1;view=text;idno=lincoln2;node=lincoln2%3A183
  [the things Lincoln was carrying on the night that he was
  assassinated]: http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trm012.html
  [a speech by the English liberal John Bright]: http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/images/vc50e.1c.jpg
  [the keyword revolution]: http://modeforcaleb.blogspot.com/2005/05/keyword-revolution.html
  [the problems with Optical Character Recognition]: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/29/science/29recaptcha.html
  [caveat lector]: http://cliotropic.org/blog/2011/03/proquest-historical-serials-caveat-lector/
  [what historians don’t know about database design]: http://sappingattention.blogspot.com/2011/03/what-historians-dont-know-about.html
