% Open Notebook History
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% May 22, 2013

What would happen if historians made their research notes public? What
would it look like to make our notebooks "open source"?

Some historians already do this, of course, after retirement or the
completion of a research project. Many scholars deposit their research
notes posthumously in the special collections or archives of the
universities where they spent their careers. Many are willing to share
old notes or sources with inquiring students or friends.[^1]

But can these fairly common practices be considered Open Source history?

It depends on what you mean by that term. In the world of software
development, the decision to release, or make "open," the source code
for a program can mean two very different things. In some cases, it
signals that active development on a program has effectively ceased;
open source is the elephant's graveyard where some formerly proprietary
programs go to die. In most cases, though, [open source software][]
(OSS) is code that anyone can inspect and change even while the software
is in active development. It's software that encourages collaboration
and sharing at the earliest stages of a project's life.[^2]

Most historians who decide to "open" their research notes for public
view more closely resemble the first kind of OSS developer than the
second. As [Andrew Berger][] has astutely observed, we are usually
willing to share sources when we are finished with them, when the
publications that they were gathered to support have been released, or
when we are not "actively using" what we have found. But in this post
I'm asking about a different possibility: what would it look like to
make our notebooks digital and "open source" from the very *beginning*
of a project?[^3]

The Promise of Open Notebook History
------------------------------------

The rise of digital media and web publishing software---some of it
open-source---has made such a question imaginable for the first time in
the long history of historiography. Open-source [blogging platforms][],
[curation tools][], [bibliographic software][], and [micro-blogging
platforms][] enable historians to easily share information about our
research *as it happens*. As [Chad Black noted][] a few years ago, "we
now have the possibility to construct and curate our research materials
and process archives, what I call ... the 'Papers of You,' in real time,
and make it immediately available to those without the resources to gain
access to our eclectic collections."

The advantages of such a practice have already been well-articulated by
the proponents of something called [Open Notebook Science][], a movement
that recently received [positive attention in the prominent journal
*Nature*][]. Open Notebook Science (ONS) is the practice of putting
one's entire lab notebook online, so that other researchers have access
not just to a scientist's publications, but to the underlying data,
methods, and experimental results that drive research projects forward.

Open Notebook scientists place a premium on sharing even the results of
failed or small experiments, which often produce what scientists refer
to as [dark data][]. Biologist [Carl Boettiger's notebook][] is an
oft-cited example of an ONS site in which *all* content is shared
immediately or "without significant delay." But some researchers may be
required (by funding agencies, for example) to limit the amount of data
they share. So supporters of ONS have also created a set of distinctive
badges for their notebooks, with each one communicating [different
levels of openness][]. Much like the stepped licenses that authors can
choose from the [Creative Commons][], these badges encourage scientists
to be more open about their research even if they cannot make their
entire notebooks immediately "open source."

At first glance, the advantages of "open notebooks" may seem more
obvious in science than in history. Sharing data makes scientific
experiments reproducible, so that errors can be more easily spotted and
corrected. But as [the recent attention paid to an Excel error made by
two economists][] shows, this virtue of transparent data has relevance
for history, as well. And, as [Chad Black has also noted][], even the
famous [Bellesiles controversy][] could have been more easily avoided or
settled if the notes taken to write the book had been available to
anyone who wished to evaluate Bellesiles's claims, or if Bellesiles had
taken his notes with the scrupulousness that would come from knowing
they might be seen.

Ultimately, however, the prevention of error is not the most exciting
promise made by Open Notebook Science or Open Notebook History. Nor is
it a very good recruiting tool. Academic writers are already a
"paranoid" lot, as [William Germano has recently argued][]; our writing
is often hampered by the paralyzing fear "that someone is always
watching, eager to find fault." If all Open Notebook scholarship
promises is more scrutiny from more potential fault-finders, it is hard
to see its attraction.

A better way to frame the appeal of open notebooks is less in terms of
*fear* and more in terms of what [Black][Chad Black noted] called "the
better parts of academics' nature"---our scholarly values of open
intellectual exchange, integrity, and honesty. One can focus on the
ethical value of sharing, as Black does. But it is also possible to
justify open notebook practices in terms of their qualitative value to
scholars. *Sharing* is something that tends to make scholars, *qua*
scholars, happy; presumably it's why we are in the business of writing,
speaking, and teaching in the first place.

The movement of many historians on to platforms like Twitter, Tumblr,
and Wordpress provides ample evidence of this impulse; we like to
discover new things---links, sources, books, et cetera---and we like to
share our eureka moments with others. When it comes to our own research,
however, historians often delay the gratification of sharing our finds
for months, years, and decades. And some finds---that pesky
transcription, the identity of that little-known person, the odd letter
stuck in the back of a folder, the carefully constructed timeline for a
series of events---are *never* shared because they ultimately turn out
to be tangential to our primary questions.

The result is a vast repository of knowledge and thought hidden from
public view, a black hole's worth of historical "dark data." Venture on
to any genealogical website and you will find "lay" historians sharing
countless examples of their hard-won archival victories and findings,
and with a joy and easy camaraderie that is palpable; professional
historians, however, leave many of our notes sitting in dusty file
folders, overstuffed hard drives, and stacked bankers' boxes. The
promise of open notebook history is the vast potential joy that could be
ours if we chose to share our hoarded wealth.[^4]

To be sure, this joy can be had in some measure without sharing our
research while it is in progress. I can imagine a line of thought that
goes like this: "It's true that one historian's trash is another
historian's treasure. So, once I'm done with my treasure, I'll share my
trash for those who might want it."

But that thinking dodges the full implications of the fact that trash
(and treasure) are in the eyes of the beholder: *The truth is that we
often don't realize the value of what we have until someone else sees
it.* By inviting others to see our work in progress, we also open new
avenues of interpretation, uncover new linkages between things we would
otherwise have persisted in seeing as unconnected, and create new
opportunities for collaboration with fellow travelers. These things
might still happen through the sharing of our notebooks *after*
publication, but imagine how our publications might be enriched and
improved if we lifted our gems to the sunlight *before* we decided which
ones to set and which ones to discard? What new flashes in the pan might
we find if we sifted through our sources in the company of others?

The Promise of Digital History Notebooks
----------------------------------------

These questions would be moot, of course, if historians still lived in a
pre-digital age. But available technology already makes it possible to
disseminate notes widely. Even paper notes taken the "old-fashioned"
(but still quite prevalent) way can be scanned and published online at
minimal cost. Still, there are different ways of keeping "open"
notebooks, each with distinct advantages and disadvantages.

Consider, for example, [the digitized common-place book][] of the famous
Boston abolitionist Wendell Phillips. This notebook is clearly no longer
in active development (its author died in 1884), but when it was,
Phillips used it to keep notes on a variety of subjects. He copied
quotes, sketched outlines, pasted clippings, and drew links between
things he was reading; in short, he did what many historians do as part
of their daily work. Take a sample page from Phillips's notes and you
can get a quick glimpse into how his mind worked: a quote from a British
review is followed by a parenthetical note to himself about how it could
be used in one of his speeches; marginal annotations point to other
passages that might be related.

![[Sample page][] from the Commonplace Book of Wendell Phillips][]

Phillips did all of this on paper, a medium with several built-in
liabilities---not least that a reader (himself included) could only
consult his notes if he and the book were present in the same room.
Thanks to the notebook's digitization, modern readers are no longer so
constrained; anyone with access to the Internet can now see what
Phillips wrote without having to travel to the Boston Public Library in
Copley Square, which is where the original resides.

But as a window into a working mind, Phillips's paper notebook has other
disadvantages that a slavish digital copy does not necessarily rectify.
First, it seems likely that Phillips added notes to this page over time,
since some markings are in pen and other are in pencil. But there is no
easy way to tell when specific additions were made. Nor is it possible
to know for sure whether Phillips persisted in seeing the connections
that he sketched out on this page, or whether he changed his mind about
them in a signficant way. Perhaps at some point he even "turned the
page," both literally and figuratively, and never thought of these
quotes again.

Historians beginning their notebooks today can mitigate some of these
problems with the use of relatively simple technologies. One is the
*hyperlink*, a deceptively simple innovation so ubiquitous on the World
Wide Web that its power is too often taken for granted. "Linking" items
together on a website is not just a means of facilitating browsing; it
is also a machine-readable way of doing what historians do all the time
when we "link" sources, ideas, concepts and arguments together. The
link, as [Gardner Campbell has eloquently explained][], is a powerful
way to "symbolize ideas about relationship" and thus to symbolize the
act of higher-order cognition itself. Phillips did a version of this by
noting cross-references in the margins, but hyperlinks would have
facilitated both his ability to navigate to related material and to see
multiple layers of relevance by, for example, seeing all of the notes
that linked to a particular source.

Hyperlinks would *not* have solved the other weakness of Phillips's
notebook: its inability to track, at a fine-grained level, changes to a
page or to his thinking over time. Digital notebooks, however, could
overcome this challenge as well. The solution here is *version control*,
a technology familiar to the open-source software world and embedded
(behind the scenes) in many of the tools historians already use.
Microsoft Word's "track changes" feature is essentially a version of
version control, a way of seeing precisely how a text has been modified
at a particular moment of time. Wikipedia's "history" pages provide a
more powerful version of the same feature. And as Konrad Lawson has
shown in a recent [Profhacker series on Github][], programs like Git
provide the most powerful version control systems of all, allowing their
users exceedingly fine-grained views of when and how files were changed.

A history notebook kept under version control would, much like Carl
Boettiger's open science notebook, allow both author and reader to track
the development of a project over time. But unlike a blog, which serves
a similar purpose by timestamping posts and publishing them in reverse
chronological order, version control would also make clear what the
*most current* version of a researcher's thinking is. An old blog post
whose arguments have since been superseded or changed remains
permanently in the archives of a blog; so does a page of notes kept
under version control. In the second case, however, older versions are
more easily hidden from view. Updates overwrite old notes while still
making the older copies available to those who want to look closer.

For those who *do* want to look closer, version control may be able to
unlock some of the deeper possibilities of Open Digital Notebook
History. Historian William G. Thomas III spelled out these possibilities
in a [2008 forum][] on "The Promise of Digital History," when he wrote
that

> the digital medium offers a unique means to create interpretive and
> evidentiary models under continual change. Digital history should
> embrace the impermanence of the medium, use it to convey the changing
> nature of the past and of how we understand it. I consider such
> digital sites open research platforms where scholars can stage
> problems and continually modify their work, readers can view the
> research as it develops, and both can continually assemble new
> associations as an interpretive model is built.

For historians, the attraction here should be easy to see. We already
believe in contingency, that interpretive models depend for their
development on time and context. Unlike Open Notebook Scientists, our
motive for providing our data will have less to do with a desire to make
our experiments reproducible, and more to do with a belief that
historical arguments are on a fundamental level irreproducible. Each one
is the product of a particular person or group of people at a particular
time and place. In this sense, open history notebooks under version
control may represent the perfect marriage of medium and message; they
can both enable us to develop specific historical arguments and
communicate the general argument most important to historians, that the
"nature of the past" and "how we understand it" are under "continual
change."[^5]

An Experiment in Open Notebook History
--------------------------------------

The above considerations have led me to try an experiment: I'm going to
see what it's like to keep an open notebook for my new book project.

The platform I have chosen is [an open wiki][] run on [Gitit][], which
has built in version control by Git. This makes it possible for me to
edit my notes locally in my own text editor, using Pandoc and Markdown,
or online using Gitit's web interface. Most importantly, however, Gitit
automates the process of keeping track of changes I have made to
individual pages or the site as a whole. The [activity page][], for
example, keeps a running list of which notes I have changed, together
with links that allow immediate comparisons between the latest version
and the last one.

![A screenshot of the [recent changes][activity page] page on my
Wiki.][]

I'm calling this an experiment because I'm aware that there are
potential downsides to Open Notebook History. Some of them came up in a
[THATCamp discussion on ONH][] held in January 2013. Konrad Lawson has
also outlined some potential objections, together with some persuasive
replies, in his recent post on [forking the academy][].

One concern often raised about experiments like this has to do with
their implications for publication. Two questions may arise: What if
someone "scoops" an idea before it can be published? And what if a
publisher won't publish articles whose data and sources are already so
open and available?

The first question doesn't strike me as a reason to abandon Open
Notebook History, for the simple reason that a digital notebook of the
kind I am describing will preserve, in what some might call excruciating
detail, precisely when an author had an idea and where he or she got it.
The second question is a more serious one, but its force can be
deflected by a simple thought experiment: consider the file drawer full
of your notes, jottings, photocopies, and scribbled upon napkins, and
then consider the manuscript you are writing or have written with the
use of these notes. If you have little trouble seeing that one of these
things is not the other, I suspect a publisher likewise won't confuse
your wad of notes with the carefully crafted, argumentative narrative
you present for publication. And if that remains a concern, it may be
worth noting that Open Notebook Scientists don't seem to have
experienced a noticeable decline in rates of publication because of
their choice to put lab notebooks online.[^6]

Still, there are problems associated with keeping an open notebook, like
issues pertaining to the copyright law governing sources, that I am
still thinking about and will take time to resolve. One possible way
forward is to do as Open Notebook Scientists have done and create a
[stepped system of notifications][different levels of openness] that
communicates to readers how *much* of a researcher's notebook or source
base is being shared. These notifications could range from one that
says, essentially, "if it isn't in the notebook others can assume that
you haven't done it, " to more limited notifications that say clearly
"others cannot assume that if it isn't in the notebook you haven't done
it."

Even if open history notebooks ultimately fall more often on the latter
end of this spectrum, however, I think they hold out tremendous
potential to create a rich back-channel of information about the work
historians do. Enough examples exist to show that it is possible to
create the "open research platforms" that Will Thomas spoke of in 2008;
to demonstrate their utility, what's needed is a critical mass of
historians willing to try them out. The experiment could well fail, but
we won't know unless we try.

[^1]: In 2010, Deborah Kaplan wrote a [moving account][] of how these
    impulses shaped the personal archive of her late husband, Roy
    Rosenzweig. Her essay, "The Afterlife of an Archive," may be one of
    the best things I've ever read in *The Chronicle of Higher
    Education*.

[^2]: I may get in trouble in some circles for saying this, but I'd
    point to [TextMate][] as an illustration of open source signaling a
    project's senescence, while [Vim][] is an example of an open-source
    project that remains in active development.

[^3]: Jason Heppler has a similar, [excellent post][] that uses the
    "open source" metaphor to argue for open access publication by
    historians. Here I'm thinking less about open-access publication and
    more about open-access notes, which raise some distinctive questions
    and open some unique possibilities that aren't necessarily discussed
    in conversations about OA.

[^4]: The recent [ITHAKA report][] on historians' research practices
    notes that "scholars are now amassing incredible personal libraries
    of digitized material, alongside the content they are producing as
    part of the research process (notes or writings)," which is probably
    an understatement.

[^5]: The sort of notebook I am imagining may also serve the secondary
    but not insignificant purpose of sharing with other historians our
    methods for conducting research. The [recent ITHAKA report][ITHAKA
    report] on historians' research practices indicates that historians
    in training often learn about how to organize and keep notes in
    haphazard way. This is changing thanks to blogs like Profhacker and
    books like [*Writing History in the Digital Age*][], but it remains
    largely true that historians keep their research workflows largely
    to themselves and leave new historians to reinvent for themselves
    the wheels we are already using.

[^6]: Carl Boettiger [reports][Carl Boettiger's notebook] that after
    three years, his open lab notebook "has seen six projects go from
    conception to publication." In a [recent interview][], he also gave
    a thought-provoking response to the question of whether he feared
    being scooped: "That concern is there, but I haven't experienced any
    scoops. I think it is an overrated fear, especially when compared
    with the risk of being unknown in your field."

  [open source software]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_software
  [Andrew Berger]: http://www.andrewjberger.net/wordpress/2012/08/29/what-would-it-take-for-historians-to-be-able-to-share-archival-material/
  [blogging platforms]: http://www.wordpress.org
  [curation tools]: http://www.omeka.org
  [bibliographic software]: http://www.zotero.org
  [micro-blogging platforms]: http://twitter.com
  [Chad Black noted]: http://parezcoydigo.wordpress.com/2010/05/28/the-individual-research-archive-hacking-the-papers-of-you/
  [Open Notebook Science]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_notebook_science
  [positive attention in the prominent journal *Nature*]: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v495/n7442/full/495437a.html
  [dark data]: http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/magazine/15-10/st_essay
  [Carl Boettiger's notebook]: http://carlboettiger.info/2012/09/28/Welcome-to-my-lab-notebook.html
  [different levels of openness]: http://onsclaims.wikispaces.com
  [Creative Commons]: http://creativecommons.org
  [the recent attention paid to an Excel error made by two economists]: http://www.nextnewdeal.net/rortybomb/researchers-finally-replicated-reinhart-rogoff-and-there-are-serious-problems
  [Chad Black has also noted]: https://parezcoydigo.wordpress.com/2010/05/28/the-individual-research-archive-hacking-the-papers-of-you/
  [Bellesiles controversy]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arming_America
  [William Germano has recently argued]: http://chronicle.com/article/Do-We-Dare-Write-for-Readers-/138581/
  [the digitized common-place book]: http://archive.org/stream/commonplacebooku00phil
  [Sample page]: http://archive.org/stream/commonplacebooku00phil#page/n99/mode/2up
  [[Sample page][] from the Commonplace Book of Wendell Phillips]: ./phillips-page.jpg
  [Gardner Campbell has eloquently explained]: http://www.gardnercampbell.net/blog1/?p=2080
  [Profhacker series on Github]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/tag/github101
  [2008 forum]: http://www.journalofamericanhistory.org/issues/952/interchange/
  [an open wiki]: http://wiki.wcaleb.rice.edu
  [Gitit]: http://gitit.net
  [activity page]: http://wiki.wcaleb.rice.edu/_activity
  [A screenshot of the [recent changes][activity page] page on my
  Wiki.]: ./wiki-screenshot.jpg
  [THATCamp discussion on ONH]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HOVQMyu90vs_Scuj5AsDBpAQgNBVDf1azxNz6aasV8Y/edit?usp=sharing
  [forking the academy]: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/fork-the-academy/48935
  [moving account]: http://chronicle.com/article/The-Afterlife-of-an-Archive/124564/
  [TextMate]: http://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/08/odgaard-i-will-continue-working-on-textmate-as-long-as-i-am-a-mac-user/
  [Vim]: http://www.vim.org
  [excellent post]: http://www.jasonheppler.org/2008/11/08/open-source-scholarship-and-why-history-should-be-open-source/
  [ITHAKA report]: http://www.sr.ithaka.org/research-publications/supporting-changing-research-practices-historians
  [*Writing History in the Digital Age*]: http://writinghistory.trincoll.edu
  [recent interview]: http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/articles/10.1038/nj7434-711a
