% Slave Sales on Twitter
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% November 15, 2014

In [his 1975 critique][] of *Time on the Cross*, historian Herbert
Gutman noted that,

> *about two million slaves (men, women, and children) were sold in
> local, interstate, and interregional markets between 1820 and 1860,
> and that of this number perhaps as many as 260,000 were married men
> and women and another 186,000 were children under the age of
> thirteen.* If we assume that slave sales did not occur on Sundays and
> holidays and that such selling went on for ten hours on working days,
> a slave was sold on average every 3.6 minutes between 1820 and 1860.

Every 3.6 minutes. I first encountered that figure not in Gutman's book,
but in Steven Deyle's *Carry Me Back: The Domestic Slave Trade in
American Life*, which argued in a [lengthy appendix][] that 2 million
remains a good estimate of the number of slave sales in the antebellum
American South. But Deyle added, chillingly, that "it is quite possible
that the average frequency of sale was even greater."^[Stephen Deyle,
*Carry Me Back: The Domestic Slave Trade in American Life* (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2006), 172, 292.]

A few weeks ago, in my [class on the Civil War era][], I was trying to
think of a way to communicate these enormities to my students. I was
preparing a lecture about some of the ways that enslaved people in the
antebellum South used their laboring power and their family units to
find points of leverage in their ongoing conflicts with slaveholders.
Drawing on scholarship by Steven Hahn, Stephanie Camp, Dylan
Penningroth, and others, I wanted to help students understand what some
white Northerners found so surprising when they encountered slavery up
close before and during the Civil War. Some enslaved people seemed to
have property that they considered theirs---houses with keyed doors;
garden patches and livestock they controlled; money they earned by
selling goods and services. These customary privileges, though spread
unevenly across the South and never recognized by the law, represented
hard-won but not insignificant victories in the never-ending war between
the enslaved and their enslavers.

Yet I also wanted students to realize how fragile these privileges
were---a fragility born of the ever-present danger of being sold. I
decided that while lecturing, I would open a small terminal window on
the screen at the front of the class and run a shell script that looked
something like this:

    #!/bin/bash

    COUNT=20
    while [[ $COUNT -gt 0 ]]; do
        echo "A slave was just sold."
        sleep 180
        let COUNT=COUNT-1
    done

Every three minutes, that code printed `A slave was just sold` to the
screen---a subtle reminder of the Damoclean sword that hung over every
cornpatch, Sunday wage, or home that an enslaved man or woman had won.

Reflecting on that experiment after the class, I started to wonder about
a similar experiment using social media. In a previous [collaboration
with my digital history students][], I had built a "Twitter bot" called
[TexasRunawayAds][], which automatically tweets an excerpt from a
runaway slave advertisement about twice a day. By slightly modifying
[the script for that bot][], could I create a new Twitter bot to emulate
the shell script above?

The result of those musings is [Every3Minutes][], which tweets a
reminder of an antebellum slave sale once every three minutes.

## Why Twitter?

My decision to create this bot deserves some explanation, especially
since one worry I have about the experiment is the risk of trivializing
the history that it recalls. I also wondered if fellow historians would
raise an eyebrow about such a use of Twitter. Scholars may rightly be
skeptical about whether a serious scholarly argument can be made in 140
characters or less, especially since it took both Gutman and Deyle many
more words---and much more work---to come up with the estimate of a
slave sale taking place every 3.6 minutes.^[It's also worth noting that
the Twitter bot runs every three minutes, which is slightly more
frequently than Gutman's estimate. But his estimate was itself a
conservative one, and as Deyle notes, "it really does not matter ... if
a southern slave was sold once every two minutes or once every five. The
point is clear. This was certainly a common form of commerce. As part of
one of the largest forced migrations in world history, more than a half
million African-American men, women, and children were transported from
the Upper South to the Lower South through the interregional slave
trade. More than twice that number were bought and sold between
neighbors and within state lines. Evidence of this trade could be found
everywhere ..." (172-173).]

Those concerns are fair. The Twitter bot is not making a new historical
argument so much as it is publicizing an old historical argument in a
new forum. My thinking here is similar to that of [Roy Rosenzweig in his
2006 article on historians and Wikipedia][]. Rosenzweig's appeal to
historians to take Wikipedia seriously had implications for new media
beyond that platform, because it was premised on much broader
rationales. "One reason professional historians need to pay attention to
Wikipedia is because our students do," he wrote, and the same can now be
said for Twitter. And "if historians believe that what is available free
on the Web is low quality," Rosenzweig added, "then we have a
responsibility to make better information sources available online."

There are challenges that come with any attempt to meet that
responsibility. Not least is the fact that, as Rosenzweig explained,
historians may find themselves subject to conventions of citation and
conversation quite different from those in the academy. That's true for
Twitter, as well. But whether historians like it or not, conversation
about history, and specifically the history of slavery, is [already
happening][] on social media. Several times in recent months, [Ta-Nehisi
Coates][] and [Jeet Heer][], who both write and tweet for large online
audiences, have asked questions about the history of slavery aimed
directly at academic historians. Not to mention the [wide-ranging
conversations][] that took place on Twitter after *The Economist*
published an inflammatory review of Edward Baptist's new book.

To participate helpfully in such conversations requires not only that
historians be on Twitter, though that is an important first step, but
also that we answer in ways sensitive to the particular kind of
discourse that occurs there. Critics of *The Economist*, for example,
used a clever hashtag to critique its review and to amplify individual
critiques. When Twitter skeptics worry that 140 characters may not be
enough to make a complex point, they misunderstand the ways that
hashtags or [numbered essays][] can track a conversation unfolding over
multiple 140-character tweets. Similarly, while it is not easy for a
tweeter to footnote a historian like Gutman or Deyle, it could be
easy---and arguably more effective, for a tweeter to `@` mention a feed
like [Every3Minutes][] and thus direct readers *to* Gutman in a way that
is internal to, rather than outside of, the social media environment.

In short, although this Twitter bot differs from the usual sorts of
[history found on Twitter][], my main rationales for making it were
similar to those of other tweeting historians. My largest ambition is to
help combat, in a new medium, the same myths about slavery that
concerned Gutman in 1975 and that still persist today.

## The Messages in the Medium

The process of making the bot has also suggested new rationales and
implications, however. For conveying Gutman's message in *this* way puts
questions to the audience that may be unique to the medium. First,
Twitter is by its nature *social* media; its currencies are "followers"
and "favorites." But this bot shifts attention from those metrics to the
*raw number of tweets* it emits, a number that will increase rapidly and
serve, I hope, as an arresting reminder of slavery's magnitude.

Of course, the bot does not shift attention entirely away from the
follow-or-favorite economy of social media. Indeed, I suspect it will
make those who encounter the feed acutely conscious of dilemmas that an
original reader of Gutman might not have faced: Should I follow a feed
about slave sales? Am I annoyed that these reminders come so often? What
would it mean not to follow or, once having followed, to unfollow or
mute the tweets? Do those deliberate or implicit acts of silencing
resemble, in microcosm, our nation's larger inability to come to terms
with slavery's history despite evidence of its continued relevance all
around us?

Even if those questions never occur to anyone but me, writing [the code
for the Twitter bot][] also raised different questions that I expect to
wrestle with for some time.

For example, I learned at the very beginning that Twitter's API
prevented me from realizing my original intention, which was to tweet
the same line of text every three minutes. Duplicate tweets are not
allowed by Twitter's code. So the medium itself forced me to generate,
randomly, a wider range of strings. I decided to do this partly by
varying the order of the phrases in each tweet and the delimiters
between them. But then I began to vary combinations of words using
Python lists like these:

    people   = ['a slave', 'a person', 'an enslaved person', 'someone', 'a black person', 'an African American']
    roles    = ['child', 'parent', 'grandparent', 'grandchild', 'friend']
    verbs    = ['sold', 'bought', 'purchased', 'traded']
    people   = people + [p + r for p in [p + '\'s ' for p in people] for r in roles]

Such variables forced me to attend to "an enslaved person" as someone
bearing multiple relationships to other persons. The code also soon
involved me, unwittingly, in a troubling objectification of the human
individuals whose stories I was attempting to conjure. (Python is, after
all, an [object-oriented][] language.)

These were the sorts of discomforting reflections I hoped my digital
history students might have while working on an assignment involving
[JSON and runaway slave ads][]. But though I designed that very
assignment, the ways in which I found myself "encoding" people still
crept up on me in the writing of my code. For me, the project has
already become more than a way to change history on Twitter. It is also
a way to think through how putting history in code shapes or changes
history.^[These are the sorts of questions being raised by scholars in
the [Postcolonial Digital Humanities][] and [Critical Code Studies][],
two fields that I now realize I need to know much more about.] What's
more, it has prompted me to think harder about what Twitter bots are or
could be for, particularly in the realm of digital history. As [Mark
Sample][] is reported to have said in a [recent talk][], "coding
Twitterbots provides a way, through making, coding, and tinkering, of
exploring what could be (but isn’t) and what shouldn’t be (but is)." Yet
what does that mean for a Twitterbot-coding historian?

People should not have been chattel (but were). They can be tweeted
(but, until recently, weren't). Yet should they be comprehended by
lists?

  [his 1975 critique]: http://books.google.com/books?id=TUtFgWOISxMC&lpg=PA124&ots=JkLLPw4h9o&pg=PA124#v=onepage&q&f=false
  [lengthy appendix]: http://books.google.com/books?id=-dbFUlQvcRYC&lpg=PP11&ots=rrAzJ-6IUU&pg=PA292#v=onepage&q=minutes&f=false
  [class on the Civil War era]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/hist246f14.pdf
  [collaboration with my digital history students]: http://ricedh.github.io/05-twitterbot.html
  [TexasRunawayAds]: https://twitter.com/TxRunawayAds
  [the script for that bot]: https://github.com/ricedh/adbot
  [Every3Minutes]: https://twitter.com/Every3Minutes
  [Roy Rosenzweig in his 2006 article on historians and Wikipedia]: http://chnm.gmu.edu/essays-on-history-new-media/essays/?essayid=42
  [already happening]: https://twitter.com/jonathanchait/status/507648800295383040
  [Ta-Nehisi Coates]: https://twitter.com/tanehisicoates/status/507648324116434945
  [Jeet Heer]: https://twitter.com/HeerJeet/status/531679565014646784
  [wide-ranging conversations]: http://www.thewire.com/culture/2014/09/the-economist-is-sorry-about-its-not-all-slave-masters-book-review/379685/
  [numbered essays]: https://twitter.com/HeerJeet/status/529749811906764804
  [history found on Twitter]: http://www.martingrandjean.ch/rewriting-history-140-characters/
  [the code for the Twitter bot]: https://github.com/wcaleb/everythreeminutes
  [object-oriented]: http://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_classes_objects.htm
  [JSON and runaway slave ads]: http://digitalhistory.blogs.rice.edu/2014/01/17/homework-1-the-anatomy-of-an-ad/
  [Postcolonial Digital Humanities]: http://dhpoco.org
  [Critical Code Studies]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_code_studies
  [Mark Sample]: http://www.samplereality.com
  [recent talk]: http://tdh.brynmawr.edu/2014/11/11/bots-and-monsters/
