% Transnational History and the Civil War Era
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% October 27, 2010

<div class="well">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [Transnational
History and the Civil War Era][].
</div>

On Monday, October 18, I was very honored to participate in a roundtable
at the University of Houston on "New Directions in the Study of the
Civil War Era," sponsored by the Center for Public History and the
Department of History at UH and organized by Eric Walther. The other
members of the panel were John Barr (a newly minted UH history Ph.D who
has written a great dissertation about anti-Lincoln sentiment in
American history), Vernon Burton, Gerald Horne, James Oakes, and Frank
Wetta.

Each presenter only had about 5-7 minutes to make some comments before
the floor was opened for questions and discussion. And that discussion
generated a lot of interesting points that I'm still thinking about and
processing a week and a half later. But for now, I thought I would
belatedly share my very brief prepared comments.

* * * * *

This afternoon I want to share some reflections, necessarily brief and
over-general, on how the history of the Civil War Era is being enriched
by new attempts to place the history of the United States within larger
transnational and even global histories.

The idea of internationalizing the history of the Civil War is not, in
itself, new. Historians have been interested in the diplomatic history
of the war from the beginning (think of Henry Adams chronicling his post
in London during the war). And historians of slavery and emancipation
have also long adopted international comparative methods. Building on
such precedents, however, the most recent crop of "transnational,"
"transatlantic" or "global" histories of the Civil War era has focused
not just on the comparison of different societies and nations, but on
the connectedness of the United States to the larger world in the
mid-nineteenth century. It's exciting work to read and think about. By
broadening our perspective on the American Civil War era, historians are
revealing the mid-nineteenth century as an era of unprecedented mobility
by migrants; an era of constant circulation of goods, ideas, and capital
across permeable national borders; and an era in which the consolidation
of modern nation-states occurred not just despite, but partly because
of, transnational processes like industrialization.

One way of summing up these points is to say that the "Atlantic World"
did not abruptly end in 1800; my own primary research on transatlantic
abolitionism in the Civil War era provides constant reminders that
postcolonial Americans still lived and moved in an "Atlantic World" in
which the "mother country" remained the dominant power.

Another way of summing up what recent historians have tried to show is
to look forwards instead of backwards, and to see the Civil War era not
just as a moment of continuity with an older "Atlantic World" of early
modern empires, but as a moment of continuity with emerging forms of
imperial and economic integration on a global scaleâ€“you can consider the
Civil War era, as world historians like C. A. Bayly and Jurgen
Osterhammel have, as a harbinger of "globalization."

I want to be brief, which means I'm being highly selective, but I think
a few examples can show some of the payoffs that can come from taking
these transnational and global perspectives on the Civil War era.

First, transnational histories of the era offer new insights into the
causes and consequences of the Civil War. I'm thinking here of [Edward
Rugemer's award-winning book][] (subtitled "the Caribbean roots of the
American Civil War") on the impact of British West Indian emancipation
on the slavery debates in the United States. I'm thinking of [Brian
Schoen's fascinating new book][] on how the world cotton market shaped
secessionists' thinking about their chances outside the Union, and of
[Rachel Hope Cleves's book][] on how rhetoric about the French
Revolution in some sense contributed to the escalation and violence of
antebellum rhetoric in the United States. And there's [Matthew Clavin's
book][], published this year, about how the memory of the Haitian
Revolution influenced decisions in the United States both before and
during the war.

All four books suggest that causal explanations of the War have to go
beyond the standard recital of domestic events that heralded the
"impending crisis." And there are also new works, though they seem to be
fewer at present, suggesting that a full accounting of the war's
consequences will also take us far beyond the borders of the nation. I'm
thinking here especially of [Sven Beckert's exciting work][] on the
impact of the war on the global cotton market and the attendant
development of new forms of colonialism in India and elsewhere.

Second, transnational histories of the Civil War era also offer us new
contexts for interpreting the era and its actors. Suggestive works by
historians like [Thomas Bender][] and the prolific coauthors [Michael
Geyer][] and [Charles Bright][] indicate that the American Civil War is
best understood, in global terms, as a moment in a long, halting history
of global nation-building, even though from a narrower perspective it
looks like an exceptional moment of nation-unraveling. Likewise, work by
Schoen, Beckert, and others further demonstrates that Southern
slaveholders were not premodern agrarians defending a civilization going
with the wind; they were savvy, modern, even empire-building capitalists
who often defended, for self-interested reasons, liberal "free trade,"
and they were attuned to the currents of a new, industrializing global
economy in which specialized regional economies enjoyed some comparative
advantages.

And of course there are many other examples of the ways that
transnational histories of the Civil War era revise or help confirm
older interpretations. But I'll close with one last point that has
increasingly shaped my own book manuscript.

I think it is important to remember that by the time of the American
Civil War the fate of "democracy," both in national and global terms,
was still decidedly unsettled. No nation with meaningful representative
institutions had a larger electorate than the United States by
mid-century. And even the American electorate was limited in all sorts
of undemocratic ways (as Robert Wiebe puts it, "before the 1860s,
slavery was no more an anomaly in the land of democracy than democracy
was an anomaly in the land of slavery").[^1] But by 1855 economic
barriers to voting that were still pervasive in other representative
governments (which were themselves still rare, even after the abortive
1848 democratic revolutions in Europe) had mostly disappeared in the
United States, at least for white men.

That unusual feature of course contributed to Americans' national pride
in "popular sovereignty," which played a large role in the escalation of
sectional crisis in the 1850s. But it also marked the American republic
for many outside observers, from Alexis de Tocqueville on, as a
laboratory for studying the effects of majority rule. If, as [Seymour
Drescher][] has put it, British West Indian emancipation came to be
regarded in the 1840s and 1850s as a "mighty experiment" in the idea of
free labor, American democracy after 1820 also was often regarded,
inside and outside the nation, as a "mighty experiment," an experiment
that very well might fail (for better or worse depending on whom you
asked at the time).

For a broad and diverse group of contemporary thinkers, the Civil War
therefore initially registered as a failure, of sorts, for the
democratic principle writ large; it seemed to prove that when push came
to shove in a country with comparatively open representative
institutions, when a powerful minority disliked the outcome of a
majoritarian election, Constitutional disintegration and violence
ensued. And thanks to extensive communication and print culture networks
that spanned the Atlantic, key actors in the American Civil War were
aware that they were being watched and discussed, and many of them also
viewed the secession crisis as a referendum on democracy whose
implications would affect the future of democracy elsewhere.

Certainly this was on the mind of Abraham Lincoln, and [Chandra
Manning][] suggests it was on the minds of his soldiers, too. In his
first [speech to Congress][] after the secession crisis, on July 4,
1861, Lincoln noted with understatement that "our popular government has
often been called an experiment." At stake was the ability of the Union
to prove to the world that a republican form of government could be
maintained. The same idea, of course, surfaced in many of Lincoln's
other famous speeches, including the Gettysburg Address, all of which
suggests that Lincoln sincerely worried about whether "government of the
people, by the people, and for the people" (a phrase used in different
versions by many democratic reformers in the mid-century Atlantic World)
would "perish from the earth."

A more transnational perspective on the American Civil War era also
reveals for us, in retrospect, that such a possibility (of popular
government either perishing or making a significant retreat) was not
unimaginable in the aftermath of post-1848 counterrevolutions in Europe,
continued aristocratic resistance to parliamentary reform in England,
and the hostility to republicanism that still prevailed in most of the
world at that moment. Looking at the Civil War from the perspective of
the whole "earth," as Lincoln suggested we should, thus may allow us to
see with fresh eyes the significance of Lincoln's victory and the
subsequent constitutional prohibitions on using race or previous
condition of servitude as determinants of voting rights. Those events,
as [Leslie Butler][] has shown in her new book on postwar transatlantic
liberalism, made the Civil War seem to many contemporaries like a
watershed moment in the history of democracy worldwide, even while
others viewed the carnage as a mark against popular government. The
identification of the Union cause with the success of the democratic
experiment also came with costs and ironic consequences, of course. And
viewed in the long term of the long nineteenth century, it was the
enfranchisement of black male voters in the American South during
Reconstruction, and not their later disfranchisement at the turn of the
twentieth century, that represented the exception to the general rule.
Nonetheless, perhaps we should consider what we would see if we
rediscovered the American Civil War Era as many of its contemporaries
knew it: an era in which, globally and at the level of nation-states,
majority rule was still the minority opinion. It's not an entirely new
direction for Civil War historians, but one still worth pursuing.

[^1]: For the Robert Wiebe quote, see Thomas Bender, ed., *[Rethinking
American History in a Global Age][]* (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2002), p. 247.

  [Transnational History and the Civil War Era]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=98
    "Permanent Link: Transnational History and the Civil War Era"
  [Edward Rugemer's award-winning book]: http://www.amazon.com/Problem-Emancipation-Caribbean-Antislavery-Abolition/dp/0807135593/
  [Brian Schoen's fascinating new book]: http://www.amazon.com/Fragile-Fabric-Union-Federal-Politics/dp/0801893038/
  [Rachel Hope Cleves's book]: http://www.amazon.com/Reign-Terror-America-Anti-Jacobinism-Antislavery/dp/0521884357/
  [Matthew Clavin's book]: http://www.amazon.com/Toussaint-Louverture-American-Civil-War/dp/081224205X/
  [Sven Beckert's exciting work]: http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/ahr/109.5/beckert.html
  [Thomas Bender]: http://www.amazon.com/Nation-Among-Nations-Americas-History/dp/0809095270
  [Michael Geyer]: http://history.uchicago.edu/faculty/geyer.shtml
  [Charles Bright]: http://www.rc.lsa.umich.edu/directory/name/charlie-bright/
  [Seymour Drescher]: http://www.amazon.com/Mighty-Experiment-Slavery-British-Emancipation/dp/0195176294/
  [Chandra Manning]: http://www.amazon.com/What-This-Cruel-War-Over/dp/0307277321/
  [speech to Congress]: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1861lincoln-special.html
  [Leslie Butler]: http://www.amazon.com/Critical-Americans-Victorian-Intellectuals-Transatlantic/dp/0807857920/
  [Rethinking American History in a Global Age]: http://www.amazon.com/Rethinking-American-History-Global-Age/dp/0520230582/
