% Why Study Digital History?
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% August 31, 2012

<div class="well">
This academic year I am leading a Rice University [masterclass][] on
[digital history][]. This essay is [cross-posted][] on our course blog,
along with a comment box.
</div>

In our first meeting of [Digital History at Rice][digital history], we
each shared our reasons for wanting to study this subject. Here I want
to elaborate a little bit on mine. My graduate program in history did
not offer any training in digital history methods, but in the last ten
years, I've had a series of realizations that make me want to learn more
about them.

### 1. I realized I was already doing digital history, whether I wanted to or not.

Since the 1990s, primary sources in my field---nineteenth-century
American history---have been digitized at an incredible rate, by [Google
Books][], the [Internet Archive][], [Making of America][], and many
others. When I began my dissertation, I spent much of my time looking
through microfilm of the antislavery newspaper the *Liberator*. By the
time I finished, there were multiple digitized copies of the paper
available from at least three private companies.

It would be foolish not to make use of these resources, so I do---all
the time. But the more I started to notice the differences among
databases and search engines, the more I began to realize that by using
them, I was already engaging in a collaborative enterprise with software
engineers. To be sure, this is a collaboration with strangers whose
names I seldom learn, but the decisions that they make about how to
program search engines, how to structure databases, and what formats to
make available to me now have a direct bearing on the work that I do as
an historian of the nineteenth century. That made me realize that even
if I never make a web scraper, scan an archive, or encode a document
myself, I needed to understand something about the way these things are
done if I want to use these tools effectively and intelligently. Indeed,
it's now as important to know something about these things as it is to
know how to read a book or write a book review.

The more I began to think about this issue, the more I realized how
ubiquitous these invisible collaborations were in my day-to-day work;
every time I entered a query into Google, or fired up Microsoft Excel, I
was, if not *programming,* at least *being* programmed and relying on
the programming others had done. Paying attention to digital history
slowly made me start to realize [how much I don't know about things like
database design][], but reading blog posts like that one and following
digital historians through social media means I now know a lot more than
I once did. That means that (at the very least) I can now make more
informed decisions about the tools I use.

So far I've related these points to my research, but my experiences
teaching were also a big part of coming to the realization that I needed
to study digital history. In the very first course I taught, I used a
blog, and I have been [teaching with blogs][] or online forums ever
since. But that experience also confronted me with the sometimes
frustrating limitations of different platforms, ranging from Blogger to
Wordpress to Blackboard---all of which has forced me to pay more
attention to what is going on under the hood of the digital tools I use.

### 2. I realized other people in my field were going to do digital history, whether I did or not.

Even if, by some miracle of time travel, I were now able to do my work
without computers at all, other historians who write about things I care
about are going to be doing digital history. In one of the journals I
read regularly, [articles citing digital databases now appear all the
time][].

That means I need to know something about digital history if I want to
be able to assess my peers' work fairly and teach it to my students.
This is a responsibility I owe to the general public, as well as to my
students and colleagues. As [Ted Underwood][] notes, journalists and
academics in a variety of fields aren't going to stop using digital
tools to draw sweeping generalizations about history even if I choose
not to. Historians and humanists "need to step up our game," as
Underwood puts it, if we want to counteract misleading impressions drawn
from casual use of tools like Google's ngram. At the same time, if I'm
going to be a responsible member of the academy, I need to be able to
think and speak critically about bad uses of digital history without
dismissing out of hand [more careful and sophisticated work][].

### 3. I realized that digital history might have uses for me in my future work, whether or not I could foresee them in the present.

Back in 2005 and 2006, while writing one of the chapters of [my
dissertation][], I spent quite a bit of time tracking the movements of
American abolitionist Henry Clarke Wright during his lengthy European
tour. I had his journal entries and dozens of dispatches written by
Wright to the *Liberator* from places like Basel, Lintz, Innsbruck,
Mannheim, and other locations that were not always easy to find on a
contemporary map. So to organize the trip in my mind, I located an old
map of Europe on the [David Rumsey Map Collection][], printed it out,
and drew on it to produce this:

![Henry Clarke Wright's European Journey][]

Not long after that, while making campus job visits in 2006, I also
decided that I wanted a handout that would give audience members a quick
sense of where the main characters in my dissertation lived and which
countries were central to my study of transatlantic abolitionism. Though
it pains me to say it now, I actually used Microsoft Word to make a very
simple image that looked like this:

![Selected Members of Garrisonian Networks][]

I wince to look at how simple these maps are now, given what I know
about the capabilities of even the least powerful GIS software and basic
principles of network analysis. But at the time I didn't really know how
to make these images any other way. A trip down memory lane in my
bookmarks shows that I saved [this how-to post][] in my Delicious
account in May 2006. In truth, however, that was not the time---while
finishing my dissertation and preparing job talks---to learn how to make
multimedia maps or use GIS software. Other things rightly took priority.

If I had known something about these tools *before* it was urgent to use
them, however, they may well have made a difference in my analysis and
presentation. That realization is what makes me interested in studying
digital history progressively over time, *even before* I know clearly
how I might use its methods. Of course, now---as then---it would be
unwise to spend *all* my time learning complicated tools before the
return on the investment is clear. But waiting until the very moment
when I need a tool or method to learn *anything* about it will, almost
always, mean waiting too long.

I'm grateful that I have had some professors along the way who taught
with that principle in mind. My first exposure to HTML was actually in
an honors horticulture class, in which we were required to code a basic
webpage. It wasn't immediately clear how that would help me do
horticulture, but I learned to be willing to learn something even
*before* its utility was immediately clear.

### 4. I realized studying digital history is fun.

All of the points I've made so far make a good case, in my mind, for
learning about digital history even if (a) computers aren't your thing;
and (b) you don't plan to do something like topic modeling anytime soon.
But in my case, I can add to these reasons a very important
consideration: I think computers are fun.

This is, of course, the most personal and idiosyncratic realization I've
mentioned so far. But there's no use avoiding the fact. I like to [hack
around][] and always have, from the days when I built a really
embarrassing checklist program using Visual Basic on my dad's PC to my
undergraduate years, when [structured procrastination][] led me to start
and design a [now defunct online undergraduate journal][]. What can I
say? I'm a nerd. [These are my people.][]

In academia, the value of pursuing something that you think is fun
should not be underrated. As [Stephen Ramsay][] writes, there is plenty
of anxiety and stress in academic life to go around. But it's possible
to mitigate them, at least slightly, by finding ways to "follow your own
bliss," as he puts it---not because that will necessarily lead you to
the next "hot thing," but because it will be fun.

  [masterclass]: http://hrc.rice.edu/masterclasses/
  [digital history]: http://digitalhistory.blogs.rice.edu
  [cross-posted]: http://digitalhistory.blogs.rice.edu/2012/08/31/why-study-digital-history/
  [Google Books]: http://books.google.com
  [Internet Archive]: http://archive.org
  [Making of America]: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/moagrp/
  [how much I don't know about things like database design]: http://sappingattention.blogspot.com/2011/03/what-historians-dont-know-about.html
  [teaching with blogs]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/teaching-with-blogs.html
  [articles citing digital databases now appear all the time]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/digital-early-republic.html
  [Ted Underwood]: http://tedunderwood.wordpress.com/2012/08/25/how-not-to-do-things-with-words/
  [more careful and sophisticated work]: http://www.dancohen.org/2012/05/30/a-conversation-with-data-prospecting-victorian-words-and-ideas/
  [my dissertation]: http://hdl.handle.net/1911/27492
  [David Rumsey Map Collection]: http://www.davidrumsey.com
  [Henry Clarke Wright's European Journey]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/wrightmap.jpg
  [Selected Members of Garrisonian Networks]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/networksmap.jpg
  [this how-to post]: http://www.engadget.com/2005/03/08/how-to-make-your-own-annotated-multimedia-google-map/
  [hack around]: http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/hacks.html
  [structured procrastination]: http://www.structuredprocrastination.com
  [now defunct online undergraduate journal]: http://web.archive.org/web/20000902170648/http://www.tamu.edu/chr/agora/
  [These are my people.]: http://xkcd.com/149/
  [Stephen Ramsay]: http://lenz.unl.edu/papers/2012/04/09/hot-thing.html
